Telecommunications, also known as telecom, is the exchange of information over significant distances by electronic means and refers to all types of voice, data and video transmission. This is a broad term that includes a wide range of information-transmitting technologies and communications infrastructures, such as wired phones; mobile devices, such as cellphones; microwave communications; fiber optics; satellites; radio and television broadcasting; the internet; and telegraphs.A complete, single telecommunications circuit consists of two stations, each equipped with a transmitter and a receiver. The transmitter and receiver at any station may be combined into a single device called a transceiver. The medium of signal transmission can be via electrical wire or cable -- also known as copper -- optical fiber, electromagnetic fields or light. The free space transmission and reception of data by means of electromagnetic fields is called wireless communications.The simplest form of telecommunications takes place between two stations, but it is common for multiple transmitting and receiving stations to exchange data among themselves. Such an arrangement is called a telecom network. The internet is the largest example of a telecommunications network. On a smaller scale, examples include the following:Data is transmitted in a telecommunications circuit by means of an electrical signal called the carrier or the carrier wave. In order for a carrier to convey information, some form of modulation is required. The mode of modulation can be categorized broadly as analog or digital.In analog modulation, some aspect of the carrier is varied in a continuous fashion. The oldest form of analog modulation is amplitude modulation (AM), which is still used in radio broadcasting at some frequencies. Digital modulation actually predates AM; the earliest form was Morse code. Modern telecommunications use internet protocols to carry data across underlying physical transmissions.Telecommunications systems are generally run by telecommunications service providers, also known as communications service providers. These providers historically offered telephone and related services and now offer a variety of internet and WAN services, as well as metropolitan area network (MAN) and global services.In many countries, telecom service providers were primarily government-owned and -operated. That is no longer the case, and many have been privatized. The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is the United Nations (UN) agency that administers telecommunications and broadcasting regulations, although most countries also have their own government agencies to set and enforce telecommunications guidelines. In the United States, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) is the primary regulatory agency.A large umbrella of companies provide different types of telecommunications services, including internet service providers (ISPs), telecom equipment providers, wireless service providers, radio and television broadcasters, cable companies, satellite television providers and managed service providers (MSPs).The three main segments within the telecom industry are manufacturers of telecom equipment, telecom services and wireless communications. Within these sectors, telecom equipment -- which includes customer equipment, such as routers and modems; transmission equipment, such as transmission lines and wireless semiconductors; and analog or digital public switching equipment -- is the largest, and wireless communications is the smallest.Large global service providers include the following:Recently, service providers have been focusing on growing services, such as data and video, as opposed to voice communication services.The word telecommunications comes from the Greek prefix tele-, which means "distant," combined with the Latin word communicare, which means "to share."Important telecommunication technologies include the telegraph, telephone, radio, television, videotelephony, satellites, closed computer networks and the public internet.The latest advancements in collaboration software, UC as a service, contact centers and virtual reality await attendees of this ...Even as the pandemic ebbs, virtual events will remain a primary way to reach employees and customers -- but make sure you're ...It can be difficult to make sense of popular cloud communications service models. Compare UCaaS vs. CCaaS vs. CPaaS to understand...Cisco's MV Sense is available as a subscription with Meraki MV cameras. Companies can use the service to count boxes in a ...Mobile phishing is a significant threat, and there are many statistics that back this up. Find out what these numbers mean and ...The latest Android update will sort text messages as business or personal and send reminders for unanswered messages. The update ...Intel is optimistic its processor roadmap can put the company back on top, but the company faces the challenging prospect of ...Safety in the data center requires organizations to identify and address a variety of risk factors, from electrical systems to ...Recent advancements in data center technology and staffing models reflect organizations' desire for increased IT agility, ...Partner executives called the makeover, which creates new tiers and revises qualification criteria, the first major program ...AIOps is still early in development; however, the technology will help channel partners and customers contextualize large volumes...Channel companies collaborate with technology providers, creating differentiated offerings that address customer demand for ...All Rights Reserved, 
Copyright 2000 - 2022, TechTarget


Privacy Policy



Cookie Preferences 



Do Not Sell My Personal Info
