Simply, the  "G"  stands for  "GENERATION" .  While you connected to internet, the speed of your internet is depends upon the signal strength that has been shown in alphabets like 2G, 3G, 4G etc. right next to the signal bar on your home screen. Each Generation is defined as a set of telephone  network standards , which detail the technological implementation of a particular mobile phone system. The speed increases and the technology used to achieve that speed also changes. For eg, 1G offers 2.4 kbps, 2G offers 64 Kbps and is based on GSM, 3G offers 144 kbps-2 mbps whereas 4G offers 100 Mbps - 1 Gbps and is based on  LTE technology .The aim of wireless communication is to provide high quality, reliable communication just like wired communication(optical fibre) and each  new generation  of services represents a big step(a leap rather) in that direction. This evolution journey was started in  1979  from 1G and it is still continuing to 5G. Each of the Generations has standards that must be met to officially use the G terminology. There are institutions in charge of standardizing each generation of mobile technology. Each generation has requirements that specify things like throughput, delay, etc. that need to be met to be considered part of that generation. Each generation built upon the research and development which happened since the last generation. 1G was not used to identify  wireless technology  until 2G, or the second generation, was released. That was a major jump in the technology when the wireless networks went from  analog to digital .This was the first generation of  cell phone technology . The very first generation of commercial cellular network was introduced in the late 70's with fully implemented standards being established throughout the 80's. It was introduced in 1987 by Telecom (known today as Telstra), Australia received its first cellular mobile phone network utilising a 1G analog system. 1G is an analog technology and the phones generally had poor battery life and voice quality was large without much security, and would sometimes experience  dropped calls . These are the analog telecommunications standards that were introduced in the 1980s and continued until being replaced by 2G digital telecommunications. The maximum speed of 1G is  2.4 Kbps .Cell phones received their first major  upgrade  when they went from 1G to 2G. The main difference between the two mobile telephone systems (1G and 2G), is that the  radio signals  used by 1G network are analog, while 2G networks are  digital . Main motive of this generation was to provide secure and reliable communication channel. It implemented the concept of  CDMA  and  GSM . Provided small data service like sms and mms. Second generation 2G cellular telecom networks were commercially launched on the GSM standard in Finland by Radiolinja (now part of Elisa Oyj) in 1991. 2G capabilities are achieved by allowing multiple users on a single channel via multiplexing. During 2G Cellular phones are used for data also along with voice. The advance in technology from 1G to 2G introduced many of the fundamental services that we still use today, such as SMS,  internal roaming , conference calls, call hold and billing based on services e.g. charges based on long distance calls and real time billing. The max speed of 2G with General Packet Radio Service ( GPRS ) is 50 Kbps or 1 Mbps with Enhanced Data Rates for GSM Evolution ( EDGE ). Before making the major leap from 2G to 3G wireless networks, the lesser-known 2.5G and 2.75G was an interim standard that bridged the gap.This generation set the standards for most of the wireless technology we have come to know and love. Web browsing, email, video downloading, picture sharing and other  Smartphone technology  were introduced in the third generation. Introduced commercially in 2001, the goals set out for third generation mobile communication were to facilitate greater voice and data capacity, support a wider range of applications, and increase data transmission at a  lower cost .The 3G standard utilises a new technology called  UMTS  as its core network architecture - Universal Mobile Telecommunications System. This network combines aspects of the 2G network with some new technology and protocols to deliver a significantly faster data rate. Based on a set of standards used for mobile devices and mobile telecommunications use services and networks that comply with the International Mobile Telecommunications-2000 ( IMT-2000 ) specifications by the International Telecommunication Union. One of requirements set by IMT-2000 was that speed should be at least 200Kbps to call it as 3G service.3G has Multimedia services support along with  streaming  are more popular. In 3G, Universal access and portability across different device types are made possible (Telephones, PDA's, etc.).  3G increased the efficiency of frequency spectrum by improving how audio is  compressed  during a call, so more simultaneous calls can happen in the same frequency range. The UN's International Telecommunications Union  IMT-2000  standard requires stationary speeds of 2Mbps and mobile speeds of 384kbps for a "true" 3G. The theoretical max speed for  HSPA+  is 21.6 Mbps.Like 2G, 3G evolved into 3.5G and 3.75G as more features were introduced in order to bring about 4G. A 3G phone cannot communicate through a  4G network , but newer generations of phones are practically always designed to be backward compatible, so a 4G phone can communicate through a 3G or even  2G network .4G is a very different technology as compared to  3G  and was made possible practically only because of the advancements in the technology in the last 10 years. Its purpose is to provide  high speed , high quality and high capacity to users while improving security and lower the cost of voice and data services, multimedia and internet over IP. Potential and current applications include amended mobile web access,  IP telephony , gaming services, high-definition mobile TV, video conferencing, 3D television, and cloud computing.The key technologies that have made this possible are  MIMO  (Multiple Input Multiple Output) and  OFDM  (Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing). The two important 4G standards are   WiMAX (has now fizzled out) and  LTE  (has seen widespread deployment). LTE (Long Term Evolution) is a series of upgrades to existing UMTS technology and will be rolled out on Telstra's existing 1800MHz frequency band. The max speed of a 4G network when the device is moving is 100 Mbps or  1 Gbps  for low mobility communication like when stationary or walking, latency reduced from around 300ms to less than 100ms, and significantly lower congestion. When   4G first became available, it was simply a little faster than 3G. 4G is not the same as  4G LTE  which is very close to meeting the criteria of the standards. To download a new game or stream a TV show in HD, you can do it  without buffering .Newer generations of phones are usually designed to be  backward-compatible , so a 4G phone can communicate through a 3G or even 2G network. All carriers seem to agree that  OFDM  is one of the chief indicators that a service can be legitimately marketed as being 4G. OFDM is a type of digital modulation in which a signal is split into several narrowband channels at different frequencies. There are a significant amount of infrastructure changes needed to be implemented by service providers in order to supply because voice calls in  GSM ,  UMTS  and  CDMA2000  are circuit switched, so with the adoption of LTE, carriers will have to re-engineer their voice call network. And again, we have the fractional parts:  4.5G  and  4.9G  marking the transition of LTE (in the stage called LTE-Advanced Pro) getting us more MIMO, more D2D on the way to IMT-2020 and the requirements of  5G .5G is a generation currently  under development ,  that's intended to improve on 4G.  5G  promises significantly faster data rates, higher connection density, much lower latency, among other improvements. Some of the plans for 5G include  device-to-device  communication, better battery consumption, and improved overall wireless coverage. The max speed of 5G is aimed at being as fast as  35.46 Gbps , which is over 35 times faster than 4G.Key technologies to look out for:  Massive MIMO , Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications etc.  Massive MIMO, milimetre wave, small cells,  Li-Fi  all the new technologies from the previous decade could be used to give 10Gb/s to a user, with an unseen low latency, and allow connections for at least  100 billion devices . Different estimations have been made for the date of commercial introduction of 5G networks. Next Generation Mobile Networks Alliance feel that 5G should be rolled out by  2020  to meet business and consumer demands.