Khaula Jamil explores the difficulties faced by Bengali-speakers in Pakistan, and how they are filtering down the generationsThere are two kinds of Bengalis in Pakistan. The first are those who were living in West Pakistan (present-day Pakistan) and chose to remain after the creation of Bangladesh in 1971 (formerly known as East Pakistan). The second are the Bengalis who chose to migrate to Pakistan after the war of separation, through the 1980s. Regardless of category, there is a clause in the nationality laws of Pakistan that dealt with the separation, giving those Bangladeshis who were migrating to the country the right to citizenship. Theoretically, anyone with documents proving they have been in Pakistan since before 1978 is eligible for statehood. But this law is not always implemented, due to corruption and discrimination from other Pakistanis who feel Bengalis do not belong in their country.When you belong to a marginalised and largely illiterate segment of society, it is likely that the required documents were either never created or have been misplaced. As a result, an estimated 70 to 80% of Pakistan’s 3 million Bengali-speakers are stuck at some stage of the identification process, with thousands having to register as “aliens” and legally considered foreigners, deprived of all the rights and privileges due to citizens.The 14-year-old in this photo belongs to an award-winning all-girl group of gymnasts, who dream of competing internationally. Unfortunately, her parents are among those with identity card problems. Most of her teammates are in the same position. None are able to get passports, so their ambitions of travelling abroad seem hopeless.As a photojournalist, my interest lies in human narratives, particularly those of empowered youth in marginalised communities. They are often stereotyped because of racism, poverty and immigration status. By exploring these themes of loss existing alongside strength in adversity, I would like my work to amplify their voices, encourage change and dialogue, and make a positive impact on their future.Khaula Jamil was born and raised in Karachi, where she works as a freelance photojournalist Sign up for Her Stage to hear directly from incredible women in the developing world on the issues that matter to them, delivered to your inbox monthly: