With its bold, decisive response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, Europeans have shown more unity in ten days than they have in the last ten years. The reason must be that European leaders are profoundly shaken, and convinced that Russian President Vladimir Putin has further mad gambles in mind  if his aggression succeeds. TURIN/NEW YORK – What explains Europe’s dramatic, costly, and even revolutionary response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine?  Germany’s newfound commitment to rearmament, which for decades would have caused an international outcry, has been widely applauded. And with traditionally neutral Finland and Sweden now considering joining NATO, the Alliance suddenly looks anything but “brain dead.” Even Switzerland has abandoned 500 years of neutrality to impose financial sanctions against Russia – and, while jaws dropped around the world, Swiss public opinion took it in stride. Most startling, perhaps, was the announcement by the Netherlands and other European states that they would send weapons to help Ukrainians kill Russian troops, despite Russian President Vladimir Putin’s snarling threat that any country intervening in his “special military operation” would pay a grisly price.   European outrage at Putin’s war is not limited to governments. Four out of five German citizens support Chancellor Olaf Scholz’s decision to help arm Ukrainians. The current surge of solidarity in European civil society has refuted the Putinistas’ bare-chested rhetoric that effete debauchery had incurably sapped Europe’s fighting spirit. Fundraising initiatives to help Ukraine are mushrooming everywhere. Countries often labeled as xenophobic, such as Poland and Hungary, are receiving Ukrainian refugees with open arms. The Ukrainian flag and its colors are now visible across the continent, from web pages to painted pets to soccer stadiums.  Europe has displayed more unity and resolution in the last ten days than it has in the last ten years. But why?  Democracies, as Alexis de Tocqueville argued almost two centuries ago, tend to be slow in reacting to aggression. Once provoked, however, they have a capacity to mobilize militarily that autocracies can only envy. For years, European capitals reacted indecisively to Putin’s maskirovka playbook of cyberattacks, fake news, assassinations, electoral manipulation, and funding of extremist parties and populist candidates. Since 2007, Russia has worked assiduously to destabilize Europe and divide it against itself. Europe’s governments barked but failed to bite. Even the annexation of Crimea and the engineering of a violent separatist movement in eastern Ukraine – overt acts of war and violations of international law – ultimately met with grudging acquiescence.  The world’s failure to anticipate Europe’s fierce reaction to the invasion arguably stems from the assumption that a peace-loving European public could never perform a dramatic volte-face and renounce its tepid reaction to Putin’s previous assaults on the rules and norms of decent, civilized international behavior. And yet that is what it did.  Our newest magazine, The Year Ahead 2022: Reckonings, is here. To receive your print copy, delivered wherever you are in the world, subscribe to PS for less than $9 a month. As a PS subscriber, you’ll also enjoy unlimited access to our On Point suite of premium long-form content, Say More contributor interviews, The Big Picture topical collections, and the full PS archive.
Subscribe Now
 Sheer horror at the stomach-churning images of the barbarism of the assault, and the suffering of so many innocent civilians on European soil – evoking the trauma of World War II – no doubt helps explain the response. But it was COVID-19 that paved the way.  For starters, Europeans are now used to crisis government, huge public expenditures in response to emergency conditions, and the closure of international borders. Two years of extreme public-safety measures have readied the public for exactly the type of radical overnight shifts that governments are now making in response to Russian aggression.  Moreover, and somewhat at odds with this factor, the European public has been nursing an intense craving for a return to normality. With the COVID-19 crisis seemingly (although perhaps not) drawing to a close, Europeans were expecting that they could work, study, and party the way they did in early 2020. But just as these hopes were taking root, Putin’s war of choice has plunged all of us back into a state of emergency. Unlike the pandemic, this latest shock to our lives was not a natural event, but instead the intentional plan of a twisted, vengeful, and violent man who has replaced Europe’s thinning viral cloud with a gathering atomic one.  In this sense, Russia’s calculated crime of aggression was hopelessly ill-timed. Deliberately thwarting rising expectations, as Tocqueville would have predicted, is a sure recipe for enraging citizens of democracies and galvanizing their will to fight.  These two factors, reinforced by sympathy for the victims, have created a public mood, and indeed public pressure, that has at least temporarily freed European governments from the fear of a pacifist backlash against their decision to respond uncompromisingly to Russian aggression. Overwhelming public support gave them the latitude they needed to act swiftly and with unprecedented tenacity.  But pandemic-related dynamics alone cannot explain why Europe’s leaders reacted in such a bold, decisive way in the face of credible Kremlin threats. The reason must be that they are profoundly shaken and afraid of what Russia might do next if it takes over Ukraine. Russia has already effectively annexed Belarus and strongly suggested that it will place nuclear-armed missiles on the Polish and Lithuanian borders, and perhaps in Kaliningrad, from where they could reach all European capitals within a few minutes. It now seems to be positioning itself to extract all manner of concessions from European governments faced with populations that, while eager to support Ukraine, would presumably balk at the risk of nuclear war.  Governments’ reasonable fear of losing political support in case Putin resorts to unnerving the European public with nuclear brinkmanship may explain the alacrity with which they have been willing to supply weaponry to Ukraine, an undoubtedly hostile act that defies Russian warnings. The risk of provoking Putin now presumably is preferable to confronting Russia later, after it had successfully managed, in a worst-case scenario, to break the will of Ukraine’s defenders.  It is evidently in Europe’s interest to keep Russian troops tied down in a relentless insurgency – if not an open war – until the fierce sanctions now cratering Russia’s economy erode the invaders’ ability to sustain a prolonged occupation.  In the meantime, we can ask if the increasingly ill-fed, poorly supplied, and unmotivated Russian soldiers will persist in slaughtering their brethren and razing their cities. Might not some of them at least be tempted to march back east to settle accounts with the bloody-minded autocrat who sent them to fight a senseless war? For more than 25 years, Project Syndicate has been guided by a simple credo: All people deserve access to a broad range of views by the world's foremost leaders and thinkers on the issues, events, and forces shaping their lives. At a time of unprecedented uncertainty, that mission is more important than ever – and we remain committed to fulfilling it.But there is no doubt that we, like so many other media organizations nowadays, are under growing strain. If you are in a position to support us, please subscribe now.As a subscriber, you will enjoy unlimited access to our On Point suite of long reads, book reviews, and insider interviews; Big Picture topical collections; Say More contributor interviews; Opinion Has It podcast features; The Year Ahead magazine, the full PS archive, and much more. You will also directly support our mission of delivering the highest-quality commentary on the world's most pressing issues to as wide an audience as possible.By helping us to build a truly open world of ideas, every PS subscriber makes a real difference. Thank you.
Subscribe Now

Mar 17, 2022
Raghuram G. Rajan

Mar 17, 2022
Yuriy Gorodnichenko & Torbjörn Becker

Mar 17, 2022
Paul De Grauwe

Mar 16, 2022
El Hassan bin Talal & Sundeep Waslekar

Mar 16, 2022
Giulio Boccaletti

                                 Writing for PS since 2016 
3 Commentaries
Diego Gambetta, Chair in Social Science at the Collegio Carlo Alberto in Turin, and an emeritus fellow at Nuffield College, University of Oxford, is a co-author of the book Engineers of Jihad: The Curious Connection Between Extremism and Education (Princeton University Press, 2016).

                                 Writing for PS since 2001 
8 Commentaries
Stephen Holmes, a professor at New York University School of Law, is the co-author (with Ivan Krastev) of The Light that Failed: A Reckoning (Allen Lane, 2019).Before posting a comment, please confirm your account. To receive another confirmation email, please click here.

                            It appears that you have not yet updated your first and last name. If you would like to update your name, please do so here.
                        After posting your comment, you’ll have a ten-minute window to make any edits. Please note that we moderate comments to ensure the conversation remains topically relevant. We appreciate well-informed comments and welcome your criticism and insight. Please be civil and avoid name-calling and ad hominem remarks.


Your name



Your email



Friend's name



Friend's email



Message






First Name



Last Name



Email



Phone number


Organization



Please provide more details about your request




Despite showing remarkable unity following Russia's invasion of Ukraine, EU leaders have yet to devise an adequate economic response. In fact, European policymakers seem to be grossly underestimating the economic risks ahead.Please log in or register to continue. Registration is free and requires only your email address.
Email
required


Password
required


Remember me?


                                    Please enter your email address and click on the reset-password button. If your email exists in our system, we'll send you an email with a link to reset your password. Please note that the link will expire twenty-four hours after the email is sent. If you can't find this email, please check your spam folder.
                                


Reset Password
Cancel

Email
required






                        Sunday newsletter
                    


            By proceeding, you are agreeing to our Terms and Conditions.
        


                                 
                            
                                 
                            Sign in with
Facebook

Google

Microsoft

Twitter

To receive email updates regarding this {entity_type}, please enter your email below.    




            If you are not already registered, this will create a PS account for you. You should receive an activation email shortly.
        