Pakistan is a country where the famous personalities have an inspirational character that inspires many to be just like them. According to official sources, Pakistan is on the sixth rank in the list of the most populous country worldwide.The most famous people of Pakistan are highlighted in this article as they are the inspiring characters of the nation who are famous through their work or abilities.The past celebrities were also known for their professional hit projects and for their significant contributions that kept them in the spotlight for years.A large fan base is required to be famous among many and much effort along with dedication and pure effort make it possible for a person to stand out as a shining star.Pakistan is known as to be the first Islamic nation that has the nuclear power. However, the nation has also given many worlds’ famous personalities just like the leaders of Pakistan or the celebrities such as Muhammad Ali Jinnah, Wasim Akram, Imran Khan, Ustad Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, and numerous other incredible persons who have played a vital role in promoting the nation.The top 10 famous people of Pakistan are not only famous in the nation; however, they are famous across the border. The popularity of famous personalities in the nation has been gained through their work, achievements and their dedication that is depicted through their efforts.The most popular personality and the leader who is still alive in the hearts of Pakistani is Muhammad Ali Jinnah. He was the first governor general of Pakistan and he was the one who along with many other leaders makes the dream true for many Muslims of the subcontinent. He provided a separate homeland for the ones who were is severe need of it to live with autonomy.So if we take about the famous personalities of Pakistan who have contributed for the nation and had left the world, then the list of the people who have contributed bravely to make Pakistan a separate nation are on the top of the list. The people who are among the most famous personalities of Pakistan are:Popularity is gained through various means and most famous persons in our society are the ones who have been the center of attention for most of the people. The list of these people is as follows:Whenever it comes to providing shelter, food or clothes to anyone, or even the ambulance network, the first name that appears in the mind is Abdul Sattar Edhi. For him humanity exists on the top and despite of any religious or cast he supported every individual that had come to him.He was a well-known and positive philanthropist; he had immigrated to Pakistan when he was in the early 20’s phase. He started his career by working at a position of commission agent. He stated to work for welfare.Pakistan is a country where non-profit organizations and NGOs are running. However, the platform of Abdul Sattar Edhi is also one of non-profit organization. Most of the people contribute for the NGOs or any other non-profit organization as to help the actual needy person.Abdul Sattar is the one who establish Edhi Foundation, this foundation runs the largest volunteer ambulance network of Pakistan where the services are provided to those who wants a homeless shelters, rehabilitation centers animal shelters, and orphanages. This is not only limited to Pakistan; however it is present worldwide.Abdul Sattar Edhi died 5 years back but his foundation was taken over by his son after his death. The son Faisal Edhi took charge of the whole Edhi Foundation.According to the sources, Edi along with his wife, Bilquis Edhi, has received many awards like Ramon Magsaysay Award that he got in 1986 for the public services. However, he also got an award of Lenin Peace Prize and also the the Balzan Prize.In 2010, Edhi was awarded with an honorary doctorate like by the University of Bedfordshire. Edhi received another award of ‘Nishan-e-Imtiaz’ just from the Government of Pakistan previously in 1985.Imran Khan a true leader, an inspiration of many and a role model for most of the people has successfully set his place among the famous people. Imran khan was a cricketer who served the national team of Pakistan domestically as well as internationally.Imran Khan started his career of international cricket at the age of around 18 back in1971 from the Test series which was against England. He played till 1992. He is considered as one of the fine cricketer, politician and a human being that is why he is among one of the most famous personalities of Pakistan.Imran Khan was not only a cricketer but he is the current Prime Minister of Pakistan also. He gained more popularity after joining the politics. He is also among one of the favorite and famous captains of Pakistan’s cricket team. He leads the team to the victory in the World Cup of Cricket in 1992 and from that time he has been among the famous cricketer and now a famous person in the form of a being a PM.Imran Khan’s party Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf was formed in 1996 and the chairman of this political party was Imran Khan and still the party belongs to him as he is the current as well as the 22nd Prime Minister of Pakistan. He was born in 1952 to a Pashtun family in Lahore and graduated from Oxford Keble College in 1975.Apart from his cricket and the political career; Khan has saved the humanity by establishing a cancer hospital by raising fund campaigns in the year 1991. He established this hospital in the memory of his mother Mrs. Shaukat Khanum.According to various sources, in 1994 he raised about 25 million for the hospital in Lahore. However, he set up a second hospital for cancer treatments in 2015 in Peshawar.In the list of most famous person of Pakistan Malala Yousafzai is first female that is highlighted in the list. She has faced many controversies but still stand for the nation while facing the world through international platforms.According to official reports, Malala is the most famous young girl in the world. She is a Pakistani and when she was a schoolgirl in Swat District in the Province of KPK, she was shot in the head. Still she kept herself motivated and stand firm with her decision to study more. She was an activist since long and before she got shot she was the one who advocate and always stands for the human rights in her district.Many media channels interviewed her and she gained the popularity via it. She always stands for educating women and the children who belongs to her native Valley of Swat that is in the Northwestern side of KPK, Pakistan.Despite of the fact that going to school was almost banned in her area. She got up with the courage and continue to study by going to school. After getting shot comes under the spot light for all media channels, either domestic or international and through that her popularity and the way to new and safe life began to live abroad.She got the back and support from international forums and she also became the youngest Nobel Prize Winner. In the year, 2013 Time Magazine also featured Malala on thefront page of their magazine.Yousafzai was the first Pakistani National Youth Peace Award winner and she was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize of 2013 where at the age of only 13 she won the Nobel prize.Wasim Akram is familiar to almost every cricket lover. He was considered to be the hero and a star of Pakistan’s cricket team. He is a world-famous cricketer of Pakistan and is considered as one of the greatest fast bowlers of Pakistan in the whole history of cricket.He was a left-arm fast bowler who bowled with a significant speed and was also a left-handed batsman. He represented in the Pakistani team as in Test cricket and also the ODIs. He has also joined the Pakistan Super League (PSL) team Islamabad United. He had also won an award of Hilal Imtiaz.Benazir Bhutto was an inspirational woman. She was the daughter of former Prime Minister, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and a wife of former President, Asif Ali Zardari. She was a successful lady not only in politics but in her inspirational life.She is the former PM of Pakistan as she was a Pakistani politician who had served as a Prime Minister of Pakistan from the year 1988 to 1990 and was again elected from 1993 to 1996.Shahid Afridi is the most beloved cricketer in the history of Pakistan. His nick name “Lala” has made his fans go crazy for him when he performed like a professional star and make Pakistani team won the cricket. He is a Pakistani successful all-rounder and has set many records in the history of cricket.He is also known as the boom boom Afridi. In 2014 he also established his own non-profit foundation to educate others and to provide basic necessities to others. The foundation named “Shahid Afridi Foundation.”Award winner of Nishan-e-Imtiaz and Hilal-e-Imtiaz, Dr. Abdul Qadeer Khan also known as the “Mohsin-e-Pakistan” is the most famous Pakistani nuclear scientist. Pakistan became an atomic power due to his super great efforts as he successfully tests the uranium bomb at the Chagai-1 & Chagai-II and make the nation proud.The most famous singer in the history of Pakistan “Noor Jahan” is known as the world-class playback singer of Pakistan and an actress who made the nation proud through her decency in performance. She was also known by the honorary title of ‘Malika Taranum’. However, she had worked in the British India as well as in Pakistan.The most famous Pakistani singer, a musician and also a music director, “Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan” was basically a singer of Qawwali as well as the Sufi Islamic devotional music. He himself is known as the guru of sufi qawwalis. His name is not only famous in Pakistan but worldwide where the music is alive.A Pakistani politician and a businessman who was had also served as the former Prime Minister of Pakistan three times. He served as a PM for more than 9 years. He is not only among the most famous person of Pakistan, yet he is one of the top most richest person of Pakistan with a net worth of around $1.6 Billion.

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Startup Pakistan got you the latest news to have an eye on the Pakistan's Statup Ecosystem. Business keeps you growing if you know about your competitor's moves. Startup Pakistan has Business, Tech, Global Tech, Global, Auto, and Startup News for you straight from the industries all around the Globe. This platform will help you to project the upcoming opportunities not only in Pakistan but Worldwide. Contact us: contact@startuppakistan.com.pkStartup Pakistan 2022