Angelo Hornak/Corbis/Getty ImagesHinduism is the world’s oldest religion, according to many scholars, with roots and customs dating back more than 4,000 years. Today, with about 900 million followers, Hinduism is the third-largest religion behind Christianity and Islam. Roughly 95 percent of the world’s Hindus live in India. Because the religion has no specific founder, it’s difficult to trace its origins and history. Hinduism is unique in that it’s not a single religion but a compilation of many traditions and philosophies.Some basic Hindu concepts include:  A swastika symbol featured on a tile at Hindu temple on Diu Island, India. The symbol is one of good luck and good fortune.John Seaton Callahan/Getty ImagesThere are two primary symbols associated with Hinduism, the om and the swastika. The word swastika means "good fortune" or "being happy" in Sanskrit, and the symbol represents good luck. (A diagonal version of the swastika later became associated with Germany’s Nazi Party when they made it their symbol in 1920.)The om symbol is composed of three Sanskrit letters and represents three sounds (a, u and m), which when combined are considered a sacred sound. The om symbol is often found at family shrines and in Hindu temples.Hindus value many sacred writings as opposed to one holy book.The primary sacred texts, known as the Vedas, were composed around 1500 B.C. This collection of verses and hymns was written in Sanskrit and contains revelations received by ancient saints and sages.The Vedas are made up of: Hindus believe that the Vedas transcend all time and don’t have a beginning or an end.The Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita, 18 Puranas, Ramayana and Mahabharata are also considered important texts in Hinduism.Most scholars believe Hinduism started somewhere between 2300 B.C. and 1500 B.C. in the Indus Valley, near modern-day Pakistan. But many Hindus argue that their faith is timeless and has always existed.Unlike other religions, Hinduism has no one founder but is instead a fusion of various beliefs.Around 1500 B.C., the Indo-Aryan people migrated to the Indus Valley, and their language and culture blended with that of the indigenous people living in the region. There’s some debate over who influenced who more during this time.The period when the Vedas were composed became known as the “Vedic Period” and lasted from about 1500 B.C. to 500 B.C. Rituals, such as sacrifices and chanting, were common in the Vedic Period.The Epic, Puranic and Classic Periods took place between 500 B.C. and 500 A.D. Hindus began to emphasize the worship of deities, especially Vishnu, Shiva and Devi.The concept of dharma was introduced in new texts, and other faiths, such as Buddhism and Jainism, spread rapidly. Hinduism and Buddhism have many similarities. Buddhism, in fact, arose out of Hinduism, and both believe in reincarnation, karma and that a life of devotion and honor is a path to salvation and enlightenment. But some key differences exist between the two religions: Buddhism rejects the caste system of Hinduism, and does away with the rituals, the priesthood and the gods that are integral to the Hindu faith. The Medieval Period of Hinduism lasted from about 500 to 1500 A.D. New texts emerged, and poet-saints recorded their spiritual sentiments during this time.In the 7th century, Muslim Arabs began invading areas in India. During parts of the Muslim Period, which lasted from about 1200 to 1757, Islamic rulers prevented Hindus from worshipping their deities, and some temples were destroyed.Indian statesman and activist Mahatma Gandhi, 1940.Dinodia Photos/Getty ImagesBetween 1757 and 1947, the British controlled India. At first, the new rulers allowed Hindus to practice their religion without interference. But later, Christian missionaries sought to convert and westernize the people.Many reformers emerged during the British Period. The well-known politician and peace activist, Mahatma Gandhi, led a movement that pushed for India’s independence.The partition of India occurred in 1947, and Gandhi was assassinated in 1948. British India was split into what are now the independent nations of India and Pakistan, and Hinduism became the major religion of India.Starting in the 1960s, many Hindus migrated to North America and Britain, spreading their faith and philosophies to the western world. An early 18th century depiction of Devi revered by Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva.Ashmolean Museum/Heritage Images/Getty ImagesHindus worship many gods and goddesses in addition to Brahman, who is believed to be the supreme God force present in all things.Some of the most prominent deities include:Hindu worship, which is known as “puja,” typically takes place in the Mandir (temple). Followers of Hinduism can visit the Mandir any time they please.Hindus can also worship at home, and many have a special shrine dedicated to certain gods and goddesses.The giving of offerings is an important part of Hindu worship. It’s a common practice to present gifts, such as flowers or oils, to a god or goddess.Additionally, many Hindus take pilgrimages to temples and other sacred sites in India. Hinduism has many sects, and is sometimes divided into the following:Some Hindus elevate the Hindu trinity, which consists of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva.  Others believe that all the deities are a manifestation of one.The caste system is a social hierarchy in India that divides Hindus based on their karma and dharma. Many scholars believe the system dates back more than 3,000 years.The four main castes (in order of prominence) include:Many subcategories also exist within each caste. The “Untouchables” are a class of citizens that are outside the caste system and considered to be in the lowest level of the social hierarchy.For centuries, the caste system determined every aspect of a person’s social, professional and religious status in India.When India became an independent nation, its constitution banned discrimination based on caste.Today, the caste system still exists in India but is loosely followed. Many of the old customs are overlooked, but some traditions, such as only marrying within a specific caste, are still embraced. A Pakistani Hindu family offers prayers and light candles as they mark Diwali, the Festival of Lights, in Lahore, 2016.Arif Ali/AFP/Getty ImagesHindus observe numerous sacred days, holidays and festivals.Some of the most well-known include:History of Hinduism, BBC.
Hinduism Fast Facts, CNN.
What are the Basic Beliefs of Hinduism, Smithsonian Institution.
Hinduism: The World’s Third Largest Religion, Religioustolerance.org.
Samsara: Hinduism, Berkley Center for Religion, Peace, and World Affairs at Georgetown University.Hinduism History.com EditorsHISTORYhttps://www.history.com/topics/religion/hinduismA&E Television NetworksAugust 27, 2021October 6, 2017FACT CHECK:   We strive for accuracy and fairness. But if you see something that doesn't look right, click here to contact us!VIDEOSSubscribe for fascinating stories connecting the past to the present.RELATED  CONTENTBuddhism is a faith that was founded by Siddhartha Gautama (“the Buddha”) more than 2,500 years ago in India. With about 470 million followers, scholars consider Buddhism one of the major world religions. Its practice has historically been most prominent in East and Southeast ...read moreZoroastrianism is an ancient Persian religion that may have originated as early as 4,000 years ago. Arguably the world’s first monotheistic faith, it’s one of the oldest religions still in existence. Zoroastrianism was the state religion of three Persian dynasties, until the ...read moreJudaism is the world’s oldest monotheistic religion, dating back nearly 4,000 years. Followers of Judaism believe in one God who revealed himself through ancient prophets. The history of Judaism is essential to understanding the Jewish faith, which has a rich heritage of law, ...read moreIslam is the second largest religion in the world after Christianity, with about 1.8 billion Muslims worldwide. Although its roots go back further, scholars typically date the creation of Islam to the 7th century, making it the youngest of the major world religions. Islam ...read moreWicca is a modern-day, nature-based pagan religion. Though rituals and practices vary among people who identify as Wiccan, most observations include the festival celebrations of solstices and equinoxes, the honoring of a male god and a female goddess, and the incorporation of ...read moreEvery year around October and November, Hindus around the world celebrate Diwali, or Deepavali—a festival of lights that stretches back more than 2,500 years. Diwali 2021 occurs on Thursday, November 4. In India, the five-day celebration traditionally marks the biggest holiday of ...read moreThe Bible is the holy scripture of the Christian religion, purporting to tell the history of the Earth from its earliest creation to the spread of Christianity in the first century A.D. Both the Old Testament and the New Testament have undergone changes over the centuries, ...read moreMormons are a religious group that embrace concepts of Christianity as well as revelations made by their founder, Joseph Smith. They primarily belong to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, or LDS, which is headquartered in Salt Lake City, Utah, and has more than 16 ...read moreThe Inquisition was a powerful office set up within the Catholic Church to root out and punish heresy throughout Europe and the Americas. Beginning in the 12th century and continuing for hundreds of years, the Inquisition is infamous for the severity of its tortures and its ...read more