
Whether you prefer hot weather or the rain, make sure you aren’t mixing up your spellings of the words weather and whether (and wether). You probably only ever need to use two of these words, but we’ve included the third so you can make sure you aren’t using it by mistake!What does each word mean? Where does each word come from?* Are there any tricks to help remember the difference between these words? “He’ll spell this word correctly whether he wants to or not.”
or
“She’ll practise her spelling whether she wants to or not.” Watch out: Make sure you never combine the words weather and whether and accidentally write wheather. This is not a word!Avani Shah*All etymologies are from The Online Etymology Dictionary.11 Aug 2014
blog homeSign up to remove this advert
Word for Wednesday: Villanelle
How Many Points Have Your Students Collected?
Word for Wednesday: Limerick
7 Ways to Monitor Your Class's Activity and Results on Spellzone
Word for Wednesday: Sonnet
3 Word Lists for March
February Round-up
Word for Wednesday: Desire
10 Ways to Monitor Your School’s Activity and Results on Spellzone
13 Ways to Monitor a Student’s Activity and Results on Spellzone
Word for Wednesday: Romance 
Word for Wednesday: Sweetheart 
Word for Wednesday: Cupid
3 Word Lists for February
January Round-up
Word for Wednesday: Refrain
UN International Day of Education
3 Spelling Tasks to Set Your Students on Spellzone 
Word for Wednesday: Left
Word for Wednesday: Dust
Sign up to remove this advert"Thank goodness for Spellzone during this remote learning phase. The site is easy for students to navigate independently and they're really enjoying the activities and spelling games. You get an awful lot for your money with Spellzone. Really reassuring is the very prompt response with helpdesk queries. I've very rarely needed the helpdesk, but when I have, the issue has been addressed and sorted within a very short time."© Spellzone Limited 2022Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy | Cookie PolicyConnect with us at:  
