Artem has a doctor of veterinary medicine degree.Does a rainy day spoil your mood or do you just love them? Are you itching for some sunshine right now or do you run away from all those cancer-causing rays? Does a cold day make you love to bundle up or do you get irritated because it's so chilly? Weather and climate can affect our mood a bit, but there's more to weather than that. This lesson is going to take a look at how weather and climate impact humanity now and how weather and climate change can do so in the future. You may not think it, but weather and climate play an immense role in impacting society. And this is said with respect to relatively normal weather, not weather aberrations caused by climate change. Think about one very obvious example. Food. Not every type of crop can grow in every part of the world in large part due to weather/climate. Tropical fruits love warm temperatures, but if you try to grow a mango tree in northern Alaska, you're in trouble. This will impact what types of crops a nation can export and, in turn, what kind of crops it may have to import. Or what about a large swathe of Africa, covered by the Sahara? Although some crops grow there, it may not be enough or a large variety. How is a nation going to feed itself? Certain initiatives, (like drilling for underground wells to sustain some crops) might have to be considered. Life might be hard for some people, and it might be difficult to build a prosperous society in such a desolate place. On the flipside, think about the relatively temperate climate of the United States, which has allowed for a huge variety of crops to be grown on a massive scale. This, of course, has allowed the U.S. to make money by exporting a lot of food to other nations and to feed its people relatively cheaply. This has allowed its citizens to spend less money on food and more on other things that have, in part, allowed the nation's economy to thrive. Besides agriculture, weather and climate also impact the spread of disease. Think about the tropics of the world. They are hotspots for all sorts of terrible diseases for which there aren't many known cures. They are bacterial, viral, and parasitic in nature. That is not to say temperate regions of the world don't have their fair share of infectious diseases but tropical areas allow for more organisms to thrive and more vectors, like mosquitoes, to spread them! This directly impacts society as it puts more people at risk for more diseases. This, in turn, can impact a nation's economy if morbidity and/or mortality is high as a result of them. Of course, weather and climate don't have to drastically alter human society. Some things are a bit more simple or day to day. Take, for instance, Singapore. It has started to build large sections and lengths of covered walkways for its citizens to walk under. Why? Well if you've ever been to Singapore you'll be grateful for these walkways due to periods of massive glaring heat alternating with periods of torrential downpours. There's not much relief from either. Singapore has air-conditioned subway systems as well due to all that heat. Compare this to the more frigid areas of Russia, where subway systems do not have air conditioning, and people don't try to escape the sun all that much since they barely get any! Then there's climate change. Climate change will affect human society in many ways. Areas prone to drought may become more drought-stricken. Areas that have lots of rain may have even more rain. This can alter the viability of crops, agriculture, and thus entire economies! Or, what about those diseases? The warmer it gets all over the world, the better suited the temperature is for disease-carrying organisms, like mosquitoes, and all sorts of viruses, bacteria, and parasites in general. Thus, people living in the U.S. may one day have to fear horrendous tropical diseases they have largely been shielded from thanks to (currently) relatively cool temperatures. This means more sick people, a higher healthcare burden, and thus a drain on the U.S. economy. As sea levels rise, entire towns, cities, and even island micronations will disappear off of the map. As ice caps and glaciers melt, rivers and lakes people depend on for water, fish, and transportation will dry up. Both of these facts will displace millions of people across the world, creating a potentially unheard of refugee crisis. And what can mass migrations of people potentially bring about? War, famine, and disease. This means societies not directly affected by climate change may be indirectly affected by a horrendous refugee crisis of the world's own making. Warmer temperatures can also increase the amount of wildfires, smog, and ground-level pollution, which sticks around in the environment. This can exacerbate asthma symptoms, irritate the lungs, and produce an overall toxic atmosphere around cities where people live, deteriorating the quality of daily life. So if a nice sunny day brings out a positive mood right now, it might not when that sun is combined with pollution so thick you can't see more than 100 feet in front of you. Weather and climate have a huge impact on human society right this second. It affects a society's agriculture, health, day to day activities and infrastructure, and economy. Nations lucky enough to be in temperate areas are more likely to have fertile lands. They are less likely to have some of the world's worst infectious organisms/diseases outside of drug-resistant microbes. Their economies tend to be better than countries in much harsher climates partly as a result of this. Climate change will also impact human society. Some agricultural lands will fail. Water supplies will become scarcer. Millions of people will be displaced. This can set the stage for war, famine, and disease of an unparalleled magnitude.

			
				
				
					To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
				
			
			
			
Create your account
Already a member? Log In
		Already registered?
		
		
			Log in here for access
		

20 chapters |
				
					
					
						191 lessons
						
										  | 16
												flashcard sets

{{courseNav.course.topics.length}} chapters |
				
					
					
						{{courseNav.course.mDynamicIntFields.lessonCount}} lessons
						| {{course.flashcardSetCount}}
													flashcard set{{course.flashcardSetCoun > 1 ? 's' : ''}}
Next Lesson©  copyright 2003-2022 Study.com.
			All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners.
			All rights reserved.
		