ContentsTemperate means mild, moderate. … If you live in a temperate climate, it’s warm and sunny, but not too hot. Like other words that sound similar, temperate has to do with measurement and range.Mumbai experiences moderate climate because of its tropical location. Being located on the coast, it is neither too hot nor too cold; weather is generally humid—places located on the coast experience a moderate climate.1a : avoiding extremes of behavior or expression : observing reasonable limits a moderate drinker. b : calm, temperate Though very much in favor of the measure, he expressed himself in moderate language. 2a : tending toward the mean or average amount or dimension a family of moderate income.The moderate oceanic climate is a sub-type of temperate climates. The regions have fresh summers and wet winters with mild weather. A continental moderate climate is another sub-type of temperate climates. These regions have hot, rainy summers and cold, dry winters.Scientists defined “mild” weather as temperatures between 64 and 86 degrees F, with less than a half inch of rain and dew points below 68 degrees F, indicative of low humidity.In geography, the temperate climates (sometimes tepid climates) of Earth occur in the middle latitudes (40° to 60° N/S of Equator), which span between the tropics and the polar regions of Earth.Moderate comes from the Latin for “medium sized,” and as a noun and an adjective it means “middle, medium.” If you get moderate rainfall, it’s not too much and not too little.The definition of moderate is something that is average, mild or within reasonable limits. … An example of moderate is a warm day that is neither hot nor cold. An example of moderate is someone in the middle of the political spectrum who is neither a strong Republican nor a strong Democrat.Moderate implies response or behavior that is by nature not excessive: a moderate drinker, a moderate amount of assistance. Temperate, interchangeable with moderate in some general uses, usually stresses the idea of caution, control, or self-restraint: a surprisingly temperate response to the angry challenge.There are six main climate regions: tropical rainy, dry, temperate marine, temperate continental, polar, and highlands.If the thermostat records 20°C, the temperature at floor level will be significantly lower. … We feel pleasantly warm in bright sunshine and out of draughts, even when the air temperature is low. Conversely, you have probably experienced “cold” radiating from cool surfaces, even in a warm environment.A mild person is humble and meek — the opposite of bold. Mild things are also moderate in some way, like pleasantly mild weather or food that’s not spicy. Mild is the opposite of extreme. There’s nothing wild about mild. Mild comes from the Old English word milde for “gentle.” Indeed, mild people are gentle.The definition of mild is a moderate, pleasant or gentle person, thing or flavor. An example of mild is an outdoor temperature of seventy two degrees. Not severe or acute.Normal body temperature Most people have an average body temperature of about 37°C (98.6°F), measured orally (a thermometer is placed under the tongue). Your temperature may be as low as 36.3°C (97.4°F) in the morning or as high as 37.6°C (99.6°F) in the late afternoon.Extreme Heat. Temperatures that hover 10 degrees or more above the average high temperature for the region and last for several weeks are defined as extreme heat.Low-grade fever The medical community generally defines a fever as a body temperature above 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit. A body temp between 100.4 and 102.2 degree is usually considered a low-grade fever.One (1.00) inch of rain – A light moderate rain never reaches this amount, heavy rain for several hours (2-5 hours). There would be deep standing water for long periods of time.Rainfall rate is generally described as light, moderate or heavy. Light rainfall is considered less than 0.10 inches of rain per hour. Moderate rainfall measures 0.10 to 0.30 inches of rain per hour. Heavy rainfall is more than 0.30 inches of rain per hour.Moderate rain — when the precipitation rate is between 2.5 mm (0.098 in) – 7.6 mm (0.30 in) or 10 mm (0.39 in) per hour. Heavy rain — when the precipitation rate is > 7.6 mm (0.30 in) per hour, or between 10 mm (0.39 in) and 50 mm (2.0 in) per hour. Violent rain — when the precipitation rate is > 50 mm (2.0 in) per …Moderately active consists of walking 1.5 to 3 miles daily at a pace of 3 to 4 miles per hour (or the equivalent). An active person walks more than 3 miles daily at the same pace, or equivalent exercise.Skipping is considered moderate- to vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity. The faster you jump the higher your heart and breathing rates will get; now that’s some serious cardio!Some examples of moderate physical activities include: sweeping the floor, walking briskly, slow dancing, vacuuming, washing windows, shooting a basketball. Vigorous intensity activities are defined as activities ≥ 6 METS. Vigorous activities require the highest amount of oxygen consumption to complete the activity.mod′er•ate•ness, n. syn: moderate, temperate, reasonable imply the avoidance of excess, as in action, thought, or feeling. moderate describes something that is within reasonable limits: a moderate amount of exercise.Moderators are responsible for the facilitation, review, and guidance of a discussion or a debate and its related interactions. Moderators use a standard or guideline to ensure that all the content shared during a discussion or debate is appropriate and adheres to the organization’s rules.Someone who is strong-willed has a lot of determination and always tries to do what they want, even though other people may advise them not to. He is a very determined and strong-willed person.Hot climate- A period of unusually high temperatures.Related Searchesmoderate weather synonymsmoderate weather temperaturemoderate weather statesmoderate meaningtemperate synonymsmoderate meaning in hinditemperate person meaning