ContentsIt can include mountains, rivers, or cities. Topographical features like mountains affect the weather mostly in the way that they direct air currents. For example, air is forced to rise over mountains. Moist air will cool as it rises, and then the clouds release the water, causing precipitation like rain or snow.Oct 17, 2017Factors Affecting Weather & Climate Climate is the prevailing patterns of temperature and precipitation across a region. A region’s climate can be tropical or frigid, rainy or arid, temperate or monsoonal. Geography, or location, is one of the major determining factors in climate across the globe.Weather is the state of the atmosphere, including temperature, atmospheric pressure, wind, humidity, precipitation, and cloud cover. … Weather is influenced by latitude, altitude, and local and regional geography.The climate of any particular place is influenced by a host of interacting factors. These include latitude, elevation, nearby water, ocean currents, topography, vegetation, and prevailing winds.How does the geography of different regions affect the climate? A region’s distance from the equator, it’s elevation,and it’s distance from large bodies of water all affect climate. Western slopes of mountains get more rain than eastern slopes because weather moves from west to east.The five factors that determine the weather of any land area are: the amount of solar energy received because of latitude; the area’s elevation or proximity to mountains; nearness to large bodies of water and relative temperatures of land and water; the number of such storm systems as cyclones, hurricanes, and …Weather refers to short term atmospheric conditions while climate is the weather of a specific region averaged over a long period of time. Climate change refers to long-term changes.Physical geographers study patterns of climates, land forms, vegetation, soils, and water. They forecast the weather, manage land and water resources, and analyze and plan for forests, rangelands, and wetlands. … Geographers also study the linkages between human activity and natural systems.Geography affects the weather in many ways. … Topographical features like mountains affect the weather mostly in the way that they direct air currents. For example, air is forced to rise over mountains. Moist air will cool as it rises, and then the clouds release the water, causing precipitation like rain or snow.These are the ten deadliest typhoons of the Philippines between 1947 and 2014. What’s alarming is that five of the 10 have occurred since 2006, affecting and displacing thousands of citizens every time. Seven of these 10 deadly storms each resulted in more than 1,000 casualties.Latitude, or distance from the equator, is perhaps the most apparent geographic indicator of climate. … Latitude also influences the prevailing wind direction. In the tropical and polar regions, winds tend to blow from the east, while in the temperate middle latitudes, winds tend to blow from the west.Altitude or height above sea level – Locations at a higher altitude have colder temperatures. Temperature usually decreases by 1°C for every 100 metres in altitude. 4. … This means that coastal locations tend to be cooler in summer and warmer in winter than places inland at the same latitude and altitude.Topography has a significant influence on weather. Temperatures and precipitation are influenced by varied terrain. Temperatures generally decrease with height, thus the higher elevation regions tend to be cooler. However, in particular weather situations the temperatures can be cooler at the lower elevations.Weather does, of course, affect various landforms on the Earth. Blowing wind can shape rocks by erosion. Storms can change the shape of coastlines. In this way, weather can change the shape of landforms.Continental Position When a particular location is near an ocean or large lake, the body of water plays an extremely important role in affecting the region’s climate. … A continental climate is more extreme, with greater temperature differences between day and night and between summer and winter.The Earth’s climate system depends entirely on the Sun for its energy. Solar radiation warms the atmosphere and is fundamental to atmospheric composition, while the distribution of solar heating across the planet produces global wind patterns and contributes to the formation of clouds, storms, and rainfall.Weather occurs primarily due to air pressure, temperature and moisture differences between one place to another. These differences can occur due to the sun angle at any particular spot, which varies by latitude from the tropics.The three main factors of weather are light (solar radiation), water (moisture) and temperature.The climate of a country or zone includes the long-term average atmospheric conditions. Thus, the climate is average weather information observed over decades. 3. The atmospheric elements of weather are air pressure, humidity, wind, temperature, rain, cloudiness, storms, snow, precipitation, etc.Hint:The five main factors which affect the climate of a region are Latitude, Altitude, relief, currents and winds and distance from the sea.The climate of a region depends on many factors including the amount of sunlight it receives, its height above sea level, the shape of the land, and how close it is to oceans. Since the equator receives more sunlight than the poles, climate varies depending on its distance from the equator.Geography doesn’t just determine whether humans can live in a certain area or not, it also determines people’s lifestyles, as they adapt to the available food and climate patterns. As humans have migrated across the planet, they have had to adapt to all the changing conditions they were exposed to.The temperature characteristics of a region are influenced by natural factors such as latitude, elevation, and the presence of ocean currents. The precipitation characteristics of a region are influenced by factors such as proximity to mountain ranges and prevailing winds.Rainfall is the most important climatic element in the Philippines. … Typhoons have a great influence on the climate and weather conditions of the Philippines. A great portion of the rainfall, humidity and cloudiness are due to the influence of typhoons.Impacts of climate change in the Philippines are immense, including: annual losses in GDP, changes in rainfall patterns and distribution, droughts, threats to biodiversity and food security, sea level rise, public health risks, and endangerment of vulnerable groups such as women and indigenous people.Related Searcheshow does geography affect climate changehow does geography help to identify weather disturbanceshow does the climate changehow do ocean currents influence weather?how does the location of a place affect its climatewhat factors influence weather?does geography include climatewhat affects weather and climate