We are open for safe in-person care.Featured conditionsIf you are pregnant, you were pregnant in the last 42 days (recently pregnant) or you are breastfeeding, you're probably concerned about the impact of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) on you and your baby. You might also have questions about the safety of the COVID-19 vaccines. Here's what you need to know.The overall risk of COVID-19 to pregnant women is low. However, women who are pregnant or were recently pregnant are at increased risk of severe illness with COVID-19. Severe illness means that you might need to be hospitalized, have intensive care or be placed on a ventilator to help with breathing. Pregnant women with COVID-19 are also more likely to deliver a baby before the start of the 37th week of pregnancy (premature birth). Pregnant women with COVID-19  might also be at increased risk of problems such as stillbirth and pregnancy loss.Pregnant women who are Black or Hispanic are more likely to be affected by infection with the COVID-19 virus. Pregnant women who have other medical conditions, such as diabetes, also might be at even higher risk of severe illness due to COVID-19.Contact your health care provider right away if you have COVID-19 symptoms or if you've been exposed to someone with COVID-19. It's recommended that you get tested for the COVID-19 virus. Before going to your appointment, call ahead of time to tell your health care provider about your symptoms and possible exposure.If you have COVID-19 and are pregnant, your health care provider might recommend treatment with a monoclonal antibody medication. Treatment with a monoclonal antibody medication involves a single infusion given by needle in the arm (intravenously) in an outpatient setting. Monoclonal antibody medications are most effective when given soon after COVID-19 symptoms start.Your treatment may also include getting plenty of fluids and rest. You may also take medication to reduce fever, relieve pain or lessen coughing. If you're very ill, you may need to be treated in the hospital.Talk to your health care provider about precautions that will be taken to protect you during appointments or whether virtual prenatal care is an option for you. Ask if there are any tools that might be helpful to have at home, such as a blood pressure monitor or a device to monitor your oxygen levels (pulse oximeter). To make the most of any virtual visits, prepare a list of questions ahead of time and take detailed notes. Online childbirth classes also may be an option.If you have certain high-risk conditions during pregnancy, virtual visits might not be an option. Ask your health care provider about how your care might be affected.There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and current health topics, like COVID-19, plus expertise  on managing health.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which
                                information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with
                                other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could
                                include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected
                                health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health
                                information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of
                                privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on
                                the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Our Housecall e-newsletter will keep you up-to-date on the latest health information.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIf you are healthy as you approach the end of pregnancy, some aspects of your labor and delivery might proceed as usual. But be prepared to be flexible.If you are scheduled for labor induction or a C-section, you and your support person might be screened for COVID-19 symptoms before your arrival at the hospital. You might be screened again before entering the labor and delivery unit. If you have symptoms of the virus that causes COVID-19, your induction or C-section might be rescheduled.To protect the health of you and your baby, some facilities might limit the number of people you can have in the room during labor and delivery. Visits after delivery might be affected too. Also, during your stay in the hospital, you and your support person might be screened for symptoms every day. Talk to your health care provider about any restrictions that might apply.If you have COVID-19 or are waiting for test results due to symptoms during your stay in the hospital after childbirth, wear a well-fitting face mask and have clean hands when caring for your newborn. Stay a reasonable distance from your baby when possible. When these steps are taken, the risk of a newborn becoming infected with the COVID-19 virus is low.However, if you are severely ill with COVID-19, you might need to be temporarily separated from your newborn.It's recommended that postpartum care after childbirth be an ongoing process. Talk to your health care provider about virtual visit options for checking in after delivery, as well as your need for an office visit.During this stressful time, you might have more anxiety about your health and the health of your family. Pay attention to your mental health. Reach out to family and friends for support while taking precautions to reduce your risk of infection with the COVID-19 virus.If you experience severe mood swings, loss of appetite, overwhelming fatigue and lack of joy in life shortly after childbirth, you might have postpartum depression. Contact your health care provider if you think you might be depressed. For example, if your symptoms don't fade on their own, you have trouble caring for your baby or completing daily tasks, or you have thoughts of harming yourself or your baby.Research suggests that breast milk isn't likely to spread the COVID-19 virus to babies. The bigger concern is whether an infected mother can spread the virus to the baby through respiratory droplets during breastfeeding.If you have COVID-19, take steps to avoid spreading the virus to your baby. Wash your hands before breastfeeding and wear a well-fitting face mask during breastfeeding and whenever you are within 6 feet of your baby. If you're pumping breast milk, wash your hands before touching any pump or bottle parts and follow recommendations for proper pump cleaning. If possible, have someone who is well give the baby the expressed breast milk.If you are pregnant or breastfeeding, it's recommended that you get a COVID-19 vaccine. Getting a COVID-19 vaccine can protect you from severe illness due to COVID-19. Vaccination can also help pregnant women build antibodies that might protect their babies. Research shows that infants born to mothers who receive two doses of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine — such as the Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna COVID-19 vaccine — might have a lower risk of hospitalization due to COVID-19 infection in their first six months of life.COVID-19 vaccines don't cause infection with the COVID-19 virus, including in pregnant women or their babies. None of the COVID-19 vaccines contain the live virus that causes COVID-19. Also, keep in mind that mRNA COVID-19 vaccines don't alter your DNA or cause genetic changes.Findings from a large study of more than 40,000 women show that getting a COVID-19 vaccine during pregnancy poses no serious risks for pregnant women who were vaccinated or their babies. Most of the women in the study received an mRNA vaccine, such as the Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna COVID-19 vaccine.The study adds to evidence that COVID-19 vaccination during pregnancy isn't associated with an increased risk of premature birth. Also, babies born to pregnant women who received a COVID-19 vaccine aren't at increased risk of low birth weight.It's also recommended that you get a COVID-19 vaccine if you are trying to get pregnant or might become pregnant in the future. There is currently no evidence that any COVID-19 vaccines cause fertility problems.If you haven't yet received a COVID-19 vaccine or if you're due for a booster shot, an mRNA vaccine, such as the Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna COVID-19 vaccine, is preferred in most situations.If you become pregnant after receiving the first dose of a COVID-19 vaccine that requires two doses, it's recommended that you get your second shot. It's also recommended that pregnant women receive a COVID-19 booster shot when it's time to get one. If possible, people who live with you also should be vaccinated against COVID-19. If you have concerns, talk to your health care provider about the risks and benefits.There are many steps you and people in your household can take to reduce your risk of infection from the COVID-19 virus and reduce the risk of spreading it to others.Above all, focus on taking care of yourself and your baby. Contact your health care provider to discuss any concerns. If you're having trouble managing stress or anxiety, talk to your health care provider or a mental health counselor about coping strategies.Track the COVID-19 hot spots and vaccine rollout.Any use of this site constitutes your agreement to the Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy linked below.

Terms and Conditions
Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Notice of Nondiscrimination
Manage Cookies
Mayo Clinic is a nonprofit organization and proceeds from Web advertising help support our mission. Mayo Clinic does not endorse any of the third party products and services advertised.A single copy of these materials may be reprinted for noncommercial personal use only. "Mayo," "Mayo Clinic," "MayoClinic.org," "Mayo Clinic Healthy Living," and the triple-shield Mayo Clinic logo are trademarks of Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research.