Cancer occurs when changes called mutations take place in genes that regulate cell growth. The mutations let the cells divide and multiply in an uncontrolled way.Breast cancer is cancer that develops in breast cells. Typically, the cancer forms in either the lobules or the ducts of the breast.Lobules are the glands that produce milk, and ducts are the pathways that bring the milk from the glands to the nipple. Cancer can also occur in the fatty tissue or the fibrous connective tissue within your breast.The uncontrolled cancer cells often invade other healthy breast tissue and can travel to the lymph nodes under the arms. Once the cancer enters the lymph nodes, it has access to a pathway to move to other parts of the body.See pictures and learn more about the structure of the breast.In its early stages, breast cancer may not cause any symptoms. In many cases, a tumor may be too small to be felt, but an abnormality can still be seen on a mammogram.If a tumor can be felt, the first sign is usually a new lump in the breast that was not there before. However, not all lumps are cancer.Each type of breast cancer can cause a variety of symptoms. Many of these symptoms are similar, but some can be different. Symptoms for the most common breast cancers include:If you have any of these symptoms, it doesn’t necessarily mean you have breast cancer. For instance, pain in your breast or a breast lump can be caused by a benign cyst.Still, if you find a lump in your breast or have other symptoms, contact your doctor for further examination and testing.Learn more about possible symptoms of breast cancer.There are several types of breast cancer, and they’re broken into two main categories: invasive and noninvasive. Noninvasive breast cancer is also known as breast cancer in situ.While invasive cancer has spread from the breast ducts or glands to other parts of the breast, noninvasive cancer has not spread from the original tissue.These two categories are used to describe the most common types of breast cancer, which include:Other, less common types of breast cancer include:The type of cancer you have helps guide your treatment options and long-term outcome.Learn more about types of breast cancer.Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is a rare but aggressive type of breast cancer. According to the National Cancer Institute (NCI), IBC makes up only 1 to 5 percent of all breast cancer cases.With this condition, cells block the lymph nodes near the breasts, so the lymph vessels in the breast can’t properly drain. Instead of creating a tumor, IBC causes your breast to swell, look red, and feel very warm. Your breast may appear pitted and thick, like an orange peel.IBC can be very aggressive and can progress quickly. For this reason, it’s important to contact your doctor right away if you notice any symptoms.Find out more about IBC and the symptoms it can cause.Triple-negative breast cancer is another rare disease type. It affects only about 10 to 15 percent of people with breast cancer, according to the American Cancer Society (ACS).To be diagnosed as triple-negative breast cancer, a tumor must have all three of the following characteristics:If a tumor meets these three criteria, it’s labeled triple-negative breast cancer. This type of breast cancer tends to grow and spread more quickly than other types of breast cancer.Triple-negative breast cancers are difficult to treat because hormonal therapy for breast cancer is not effective. Learn about treatments and survival rates for triple-negative breast cancer.Doctors divide breast cancer into stages based on the size of the tumor and how much it has spread.Cancers that are large or have invaded nearby tissues or organs are at a higher stage than cancers that are small or still contained in the breast. To stage breast cancer, doctors need to know:Breast cancer has five main stages: stages 0 to 4.Stage 0 is DCIS. Cancer cells in DCIS remain confined to the ducts in the breast and have not spread into nearby tissue.Stage 4 breast cancer can have a tumor of any size. Its cancer cells have spread to nearby and distant lymph nodes as well as distant organs.The testing your doctor does will determine the stage of your breast cancer, which will affect your treatment.Find out how different breast cancer stages are treated.Although they generally have less of it, men have breast tissue just like women do. Men can develop breast cancer too, but it’s much rarer.According to the ACS, breast cancer is 70 times less common in Black men than in Black women. It’s 100 times less common in white men than in white women.That said, the breast cancer that men develop is just as serious as the breast cancer that women develop. It also has the same symptoms. If you’re a man, follow the same monitoring instructions as women and report any changes to breast tissue or new lumps to your doctor.Read more about breast cancer in men and the symptoms to watch for.Breast cancer survival rates vary widely based on many factors.Two of the most important factors are the type of cancer you have and the stage of the cancer at the time you receive a diagnosis. Other factors that may play a role include:Research from 2021 shows there’s a higher mortality rate in People of Color with breast cancer diagnoses compared with white people. One reason for this may be healthcare disparities.The good news is breast cancer survival rates are improving.According to the ACS, in 1975, the 5-year survival rate for breast cancer in women was 75.2 percent. But for women diagnosed between 2008 and 2014, it was 90.6 percent.The 5-year survival rates for breast cancer differ depending on the stage at diagnosis. They range from 99 percent for localized early stage cancers to 27 percent for advanced metastatic cancers.Find out more about survival statistics and the factors that affect them.To determine if your symptoms are caused by breast cancer or a benign breast condition, your doctor will do a thorough physical exam in addition to a breast exam. They may also request one or more diagnostic tests to help understand what’s causing your symptoms.Tests that can help your doctor diagnose breast cancer include:Your doctor may also suggest tests such as an MRI or a breast biopsy.Learn about other tests that can be used to detect breast cancer.If you don’t already have a primary care doctor, you can browse doctors in your area through the Healthline FindCare tool.If your doctor suspects breast cancer based on tests like a mammogram or an ultrasound, they may do a test called a breast biopsy.During this test, your doctor will remove a tissue sample from the suspicious area to have it tested.There are several types of breast biopsies. With some of these tests, your doctor uses a needle to take the tissue sample. With others, they make an incision in your breast and then remove the sample.Your doctor will send the tissue sample to a laboratory. If the sample tests positive for cancer, the lab can test it further to tell your doctor what type of cancer you have.Learn more about breast biopsies, how to prepare for one, and what to expect.Your breast cancer’s stage, how far it has invaded (if it has), and how big the tumor has grown all play a large part in determining what kind of treatment you’ll need.To start, your doctor will determine your cancer’s size, stage, and grade. Your cancer’s grade describes how likely it is to grow and spread. After that, you can discuss your treatment options.Surgery is the most common treatment for breast cancer. Many people have additional treatments, such as chemotherapy, targeted therapy, radiation, or hormone therapy.Several types of surgery may be used to remove breast cancer, including:With radiation therapy, high-powered beams of radiation are used to target and kill cancer cells. Most radiation treatments use external beam radiation. This technique uses a large machine on the outside of the body.Advances in cancer treatment have also enabled doctors to irradiate cancer from inside the body. According to Breastcancer.org, this type of radiation treatment is called brachytherapy.To conduct brachytherapy, surgeons place radioactive seeds, or pellets, inside the body near the tumor site. The seeds stay there for a short period of time and work to destroy cancer cells.Chemotherapy is a drug treatment used to destroy cancer cells. Some people may undergo chemotherapy on its own, but this type of treatment is often used along with other treatments, especially surgery.Some people will have surgery first followed by other treatments, such as chemo or radiation. This is called adjuvant therapy. Others may have chemotherapy first to shrink the cancer, called neoadjuvant therapy, then surgery.In some cases, doctors prefer to give chemotherapy before surgery. The hope is that the treatment will shrink the tumor, and then the surgery will not need to be as invasive.Chemotherapy has many unwanted side effects, so discuss your concerns with your doctor before starting treatment.If your type of breast cancer is sensitive to hormones, your doctor may start you on hormone therapy. Estrogen and progesterone, two female hormones, can stimulate the growth of breast cancer tumors.Hormone therapy works by blocking your body’s production of these hormones or by blocking the hormone receptors on the cancer cells. This action can help slow and possibly stop the growth of your cancer.Certain treatments are designed to attack specific irregularities or mutations within cancer cells.For example, Herceptin (trastuzumab) can block your body’s production of the HER2 protein. HER2 helps breast cancer cells grow, so taking a medication to slow the production of this protein may help slow cancer growth.Your doctor will tell you more about any specific treatment they recommend for you.Learn more about breast cancer treatments, as well as how hormones affect cancer growth.Breast cancer can cause a range of symptoms, and these symptoms can appear differently in different people.If you’re concerned about a spot or change in your breast, it can be helpful to know what breast problems that are actually cancer look like.Learn more about breast cancer symptoms and see pictures of what they can look like.If you detect an unusual lump or spot in your breast or have any other symptoms of breast cancer, make an appointment to visit your doctor. Chances are good that it’s not breast cancer. For instance, there are many other potential causes for breast lumps. But if your problem does turn out to be cancer, keep in mind that early treatment is the key. Early stage breast cancer can often be treated and cured if found quickly enough. The longer breast cancer can grow, the more difficult treatment becomes.If you’ve already received a breast cancer diagnosis, keep in mind that cancer treatments continue to improve, as do outcomes. So follow your treatment plan and try to stay positive.Find out more about the outlook for different stages of breast cancer.Bezzy Breast Cancer is a free app for people who have faced a breast cancer diagnosis. The app is available on the App Store and Google Play. Download here.According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), breast cancer is the second most common cancer in women.According to the ACS, in the United States in 2021, an estimated 281,550 new cases of invasive breast cancer were diagnosed in women, and 2,650 cases diagnosed in men. An additional 49,290 cases of DCIS were diagnosed in women. An estimated 44,130 breast cancer deaths occurred in 2021, including 43,600 women and 530 men.Find out more about breast cancer numbers around the world.There are several risk factors that increase your chances of getting breast cancer. However, having any of these doesn’t mean you will definitely develop the disease.Some risk factors can’t be avoided, such as family history. You can change other risk factors, such as smoking. Risk factors for breast cancer include:While there are risk factors you can’t control, following a healthy lifestyle, getting regular screenings, and taking any preventive measures your doctor recommends can help lower your risk of developing breast cancer. Lifestyle factors can affect your risk of breast cancer.For instance, people who have obesity have a higher risk of developing breast cancer. Maintaining a nutrient-dense diet and getting regular exercise as often as possible could help you lose weight and lower your risk. According to the American Association for Cancer Research, alcohol misuse also increases your risk. This can be having more than two drinks per day or binge-drinking.If you drink alcohol, talk with your doctor about what amount they recommend for you.Having regular mammograms may not prevent breast cancer, but it can help reduce the chance that it will go undetected.The American College of Physicians (ACP) provides the following general recommendations for women at average risk of breast cancer:The ACP also recommends against mammograms for women with a life expectancy of 10 years or less.These are only guidelines.Recommendations from the ACS differ. According to the ACS, women should:Specific recommendations for mammograms are different for everyone, so talk with your doctor to see if you should get regular mammograms.You may have an increased risk of breast cancer due to hereditary factors. For instance, if your parent has a BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation, you’re at higher risk of having it as well. This significantly raises your risk of breast cancer.If you’re at risk for this mutation, talk with your doctor about your diagnostic and prophylactic treatment options. You may want to be tested to find out whether you have the mutation. And if you learn that you do have it, talk with your doctor about any preemptive steps you can take to reduce your risk of developing breast cancer. These steps could include a prophylactic mastectomy, or surgical removal of a breast. You may also consider chemoprophylaxis, or taking medication, such as Tamoxifen, to potentially reduce your breast cancer risk. In addition to mammograms, breast exams are another way to watch for signs of breast cancer.Many people do a breast self-examination. It’s best to do this exam once per month, at the same time each month. The exam can help you become familiar with how your breasts usually look and feel so that you’re aware of any changes that occur.Keep in mind, though, that the ACS considers these exams to be optional, because current research hasn’t shown a clear benefit of physical exams, whether performed at home or by a doctor. The same guidelines for self-exams provided above are true for breast exams done by your doctor or other healthcare professional. They won’t hurt you, and your doctor may do a breast exam during your annual visit.If you’re having symptoms that concern you, it’s a good idea to have your doctor do a breast exam. During the exam, your doctor will check both of your breasts for abnormal spots or signs of breast cancer.Your doctor may also check other parts of your body to see if the symptoms you’re having could be related to another condition.Learn more about what your doctor may look for during a breast exam.People around the world are increasingly aware of the issues associated with breast cancer. Breast cancer awareness efforts have helped people learn:Breast Cancer Awareness Month is held each October, but many people spread the word throughout the year.Check out these breast cancer blogs for first-person insight from women living with this disease with passion and humor.Read this article in Spanish. Last medically reviewed on  February 4, 2022 20 sourcescollapsedLife changes after a cancer diagnosis. From letting go of what you can't control to making anything an adventure, here are one woman's mantras for…It can be hard but necessary for independent people to accept help after a breast cancer diagnosis. Here's how a successful editor learned to rely on…Certain foods may lower your chances of developing breast cancer, while others may raise it. Here are 10 foods to eat — and 6 to avoid — to help…If you have breast cancer, you may be wondering if it's safe to practice yoga. If your doctor gives you the OK, here's a gentle routine to try.These activities can help you find pleasure in life while undergoing cancer treatment.OUR BRANDS