The term professional refers to anyone who earns their living from performing an activity that requires a certain level of education, skill, or training. There is typically a required standard of competency, knowledge, or education that must be demonstrated (often in the form of an exam or credential), as well as adhering to codes of conduct and ethical standards.  There are many different types of professionals. Whether they are athletes or business people, there are many categories and groups, which are listed below.Types of professionals include: Professional standards are a set of practices, ethics, and behaviors that members of a particular professional group must adhere to. These sets of standards are frequently agreed to by a governing body that represents the interests of the group.Examples of professional standards include:  A professional performs an activity to earn a living and has demonstrated a certain level of competence or earned a credential, whereas an amateur performs an activity as a hobby, pastime, or without compensation.Examples of amateurs include: There are many examples of the types of designations that professionals must earn or choose to earn in carrying out their activities.Common designations include:See a full list of designations in the United States here. Become a Certified Financial Modeling & Valuation Analyst (FMVA)®CFI's Financial Modeling and Valuation Analyst (FMVA)® certification will help you gain the confidence you need in your finance career. Enroll today! CFI is the official global provider of the FMVA™Become a Certified Financial Modeling & Valuation Analyst (FMVA)®CFI's Financial Modeling and Valuation Analyst (FMVA)® certification will help you gain the confidence you need in your finance career. Enroll today! certification, designed to transform anyone into a world-class financial analyst.To keep learning and advancing your career, please see these additional CFI resources:Become a certified Financial Modeling and Valuation Analyst (FMVA)®Become a Certified Financial Modeling & Valuation Analyst (FMVA)®CFI's Financial Modeling and Valuation Analyst (FMVA)® certification will help you gain the confidence you need in your finance career. Enroll today! by completing CFI’s online financial modeling classes and training program!