We’re here to deliver safe, thoughtful, high-quality care for kids who need it. Learn about visitation policies and the ways we’re keeping patients safe, including face covering requirements.Find options for COVID-19 testing or browse all COVID-19 resources for families.Caring pediatric nurses are available 24/7 to help answer your health questions.Children’s Hospital ColoradoAnschutz Medical Campus13123 East 16th AvenueAurora, CO 80045Looking for a different location?See a listing of all our Children’s Hospital Colorado locations including inpatient, outpatient, therapy, surgery facilities and more.In life-threatening emergencies, find the emergency room location nearest you. For non-life-threatening medical needs when your pediatrician is unavailable, visit one of our urgent care locations.To help inform you about the latest coronavirus (COVID-19) updates, experts from Children's Colorado have gathered information from local and national health authorities.Read our resources and updates.All children should have a chance for a healthy future.DonateVolunteerGive BloodThis conference will review single-sided deafness, discuss the current...See All EventsIn an era of aggressive marketing toward kids and parents alike, many parents wonder what kids actually need. Turns out, there's a pretty clear answer."Years of research in child development have identified eight essential requirements for kids to become happy, successful adults," says Harley Rotbart, MD, a nationally-renowned parenting expert and vice chair emeritus of Pediatrics at Children's Colorado. "And none of them involve high-tech gadgets, video games or fancy clothes."Kids must feel safe and sound, with their basic survival needs met: shelter, food, clothing, medical care and protection from harm.Stability comes from family and community. Ideally, a family remains together in a stable household, but when that's not possible, it's important to disrupt the child's life as little as possible. Kids and families should be a part of larger units to give them a sense of belonging, tradition and cultural continuity.No "good cop, bad cop." Parents should synchronize their parenting and make sure important values stay consistent.Parents' words and actions should encourage kids' trust, respect, self-esteem and, ultimately, independence.Saying and showing you love your kids can overcome almost any parenting "mistakes" you might make. Even when your kids have disobeyed, angered, frustrated and rebelled against you, show them you love them and that you'll always love them.Make sure your kids get the best possible education for their future. This includes school, of course, but it also includes the invaluable life lessons you provide during the time you spend together.Parents are their kids' first and most important role models. Instill your values and teach children empathy by being the kind of person you want them to become.Rules, boundaries, and limits: Without them, kids are forced to be adults before they are ready, and they lose respect for you and other adults.Perhaps the most important factor of all is time. Without enough time to spend with kids and be a parent, "You miss out on the wonderful privileges of parenting," Dr. Rotbart says. "And kids miss out on some of their needs."The converse is also true."Time is the miracle solution for most dilemmas of parenthood," says Dr. Rotbart. "Taken in minutes or hours, the time you spend with your kids gives you the opportunity to provide your kids all their essential needs — and much more."Learn Dr. Rotbart's advice for creating quality time with your kids. About Children's Hospital ColoradoWe see more, treat more and heal more children than any hospital in our seven-state region. Learn about our mission and more, or search for opportunities to join our team.Learn how we workLearn how we're addressing community health needsWe're a nonprofit that is supported by donorsWhen you give to Children's Colorado, you're helping us to reimagine children's health through patient care, education, research and advocacy.Donate nowQuick Links
Affiliated with the University of Colorado School of Medicine

        Expert advice delivered directly to you.
            Get weekly tips
Children's Hospital Colorado partners with NRC Health to gather star ratings and reviews from patients, residents and family survey data.

This provider either practices in a department or specialty that we currently do not survey, or does not have at least 10 ratings in the last 12 months.  Learn more about patient ratings and reviews.Children’s Hospital Colorado providers are faculty members of the University of Colorado School of Medicine. Our specialists are nationally ranked and globally recognized for delivering the best possible care in pediatrics.Some healthcare professionals listed on our website have medical privileges to practice at Children’s Hospital Colorado, but they are community providers. They schedule and bill separately for their services, and are not employees of the Hospital.