How to stay strong and coordinated as you ageBrain fog: Memory and attention after COVID-19Why all the buzz about inflammation — and just how bad is..."Vitamin M" — is melatonin the cure for your sleep problems?The care that transgender youth need and deserveAnti-inflammatory food superstars for every seasonWarming up to the cold: Staying active in any weatherStruggling to sleep? Your heart may pay the priceThe mental health crisis among children and teens: How parents can helpHarvard Health Ad Watch: A blood thinner winner?Nutrition

Berries and watermelon in the summer, kale and beets in the winter. The recipe for anti-inflammatory foods to enjoy can change with the seasons.Your heart, your brain, and even your joints can benefit from a steady diet of these nutritious foods, and scientists think that their effects on inflammation may be one reason why.Inflammation is part of your body’s healing mechanism — the reason why your knee swelled and turned red when you injured it. But this inflammatory repair process can sometimes go awry, lasting too long and harming instead of helping. When inflammation is caused by an ongoing problem, it can contribute to health problems. Over time, inflammation stemming from chronic stress, obesity, or an autoimmune disorder may potentially trigger conditions such as arthritis, heart disease, or cancer. It may also harm the brain. Researchers have found a link between higher levels of inflammation inside the brain and an elevated risk for cognitive decline and impairment. Regularly adding anti-inflammatory foods to your diet may help to switch off this process.Research hasn’t looked specifically at the anti-inflammatory benefits of eating foods that are in season. "But it’s generally accepted that eating what’s in season is likely to be fresher and obviously there are other benefits, including those for the environment," says Natalie McCormick, a research fellow in medicine at Harvard Medical School. Eating foods that are in season may also help your grocery bill.When it comes to anti-inflammatory foods, the goal should be to incorporate as many as you can into your overall diet. "Our emphasis now is on eating patterns, because it seems that interactions between foods and their combinations have a greater effect than individual foods," says McCormick.Three diets in particular, she says, contain the right mix of elements: The Mediterranean diet, the DASH diet, and the Alternative Healthy Eating Index. These diets are similar in that they put the emphasis on foods that are also known to be anti-inflammatory, such as colorful fruits and vegetables, whole grains, legumes, and healthy fats such as olive oil and nut butters. But just as importantly, these diets also eliminate foods — such as highly processed snacks, red meat, and sugary drinks — that can increase levels of inflammatory markers inside the body, including a substance called C-reactive protein.Mixing and matching different foods from these diets can help you tailor an anti-inflammatory approach that fits your personal tastes, as can choosing the freshest in-season offerings. Whole grains, legumes, and heart-healthy oils can be year-round staples, but mix and match your fruits and vegetables for more variety. Below are some great options by season.In the cold winter months, think green. Many green leafy vegetables star during this season, including kale, collard greens, and swiss chard. Root vegetables like beets are another great and hardy winter option. Reach for sweet potatoes and turnips. Other options to try are kiwi fruit, brussels sprouts, lemons, oranges, and pineapple.When the spring months arrive, look for asparagus, apricots, avocados, rhubarb, carrots, mushrooms, and celery, as well as fresh herbs.Summer is prime time for many types of produce, and you’ll have lots of choices. Berries are a great anti-inflammatory option. Try different varieties of blueberries, blackberries, and strawberries. Go local with marionberries, huckleberries, gooseberries, and cloud berries, which grow in different parts of the US. Also reach for cherries, eggplant, zucchini, watermelon, green beans, honeydew melon, okra, peaches, and plums.Nothing says fall like a crisp, crunchy apple. But there are a host of other anti-inflammatory foods to try as well, such as cabbage, cauliflower, garlic, winter squash, parsnips, peas, ginger, and all types of lettuce.Whenever possible, when you choose an anti-inflammatory food try to substitute it for a less healthy option. For example, trade a muffin for a fresh-berry fruit salad, or a plate of French fries for a baked sweet potato. Making small trades in your diet can add up to big health benefits over time.
    As a service to our readers, Harvard Health Publishing provides access to our library of archived content.
    Please note the date of last review or update on all articles. No content on this site, regardless of date,
    should ever be used as a substitute for direct medical advice from your doctor or other qualified clinician.
very much informative  ThanksCommenting has been closed for this post.You might also be interested in…In this Harvard Medical School Guide you’ll be introduced to foods—more than 120 in all—that will help you turn out meals that fight inflammation and disease.  You’ll learn how plant-based chemicals called phytochemicals act as antioxidant and anti-inflammatory agents, helping to bring down levels of inflammation and to counteract inflammation’s harmful effects. And you’ll find dozens of anti-inflammatory foods with added health benefits that include lowering cholesterol, reducing the risk of Alzheimer’s disease and of stroke, improving blood pressure, adding protection against heart disease, and even reducing pain and soreness after exercise.NutritionNutritionNutritionGet the latest in health news delivered to your inbox!
                    © 2022 by The President and Fellows of Harvard College
                Do not sell my personal information | Privacy PolicyThanks for visiting. Don't miss your FREE gift.The Best Diets for Cognitive Fitness, is yours absolutely FREE when you sign up to receive Health Alerts from Harvard Medical SchoolSign up to get tips for living a healthy lifestyle, with ways to  fight inflammation and improve cognitive health, plus the latest advances in preventative medicine, diet and exercise, pain relief, blood pressure and cholesterol management, and more.Health Alerts from Harvard Medical SchoolGet helpful tips and guidance for everything from fighting inflammation to finding the best diets for weight loss...from exercises to build a stronger core to advice on treating cataracts. PLUS, the latest news on medical advances and breakthroughs from Harvard Medical School experts.BONUS! Sign up now and get a FREE copy of theBest Diets for Cognitive FitnessStay on top of latest health news from Harvard Medical School.Plus, get a FREE copy of the Best Diets for Cognitive Fitness.