I have had a lifelong passion for the game of tennis from my days as a competitive youth player to now following the world's top players.The International Tennis Hall of Fame and MuseumBill DeGiulioSelecting the top 10 of anything can be a difficult and subjective task. There have been so many great women players over the last 50 years of the Open Era, and this doesn't even take into consideration the great players from the early 20th century. Changes in fitness regimes, nutrition, and racket technology over the years have only served to complicate an already difficult task. As difficult as it was to choose the top 10 all-time greatest male tennis players, the women's top 10 proved no easier.After pouring through countless statistical records and my own personal memory banks, I have come up with a list of the best female tennis players during the Open Era of tennis—from 1968 to the present. I have actually included 11 players here, with two greats tied for the 10th position. Here they are.Martina HingisBy si.robi via Wikimedia CommonsWith 5 Grand Slam singles titles and 209 weeks ranked number one in the world, Martina Hingis makes a strong argument to be ranked in the top 10 all-time. Factor in her 13 Grand Slam Doubles titles, 7 Mixed Doubles titles, and her 2 Tour Finals titles, and it’s hard to exclude the Swiss star. Her singles career was relatively short due to injuries and her first retirement came in 2003 at just 22 years of age. Had she remained healthy, she certainly would have contended for many more Grand Slam singles titles. Martina was able to extend her tennis career by playing mostly doubles and had great success with 3 Grand Slam Doubles titles in 2017, her final year in competitive tennis.Evonne GoolagongBill DeGiulioOften overlooked because she played during the Chris Everett and Martina Navratilova era, Goolagong was the epitome of grace and beauty on the court. Despite playing during one of the most competitive periods in women’s tennis, Goolagong was still able to win seven Grand Slam titles. In 1976, she was ranked number one in the world.She has the distinction of being the only mother since before World War I to have won Wimbledon, having won the title in 1980 after giving birth to her daughter in 1977.The only Grand Slam title to elude her was the US Open, where she reached the finals in four consecutive years, 1973-1976.Justin HeninBy Glenn Thomas via Wikimedia CommonsKnown for her mental and physical toughness, Justine Henin was one of the most athletic women to ever play the game. Despite her small stature, she packed a powerful punch and played a complete game that included a powerful serve and a forehand shot that she hit with both power and accuracy. Known as one of the best volleyers in the game, Henin was as comfortable at the net as from the baseline.In 2003, she achieved the number one ranking in the world, having won both the French Open and the US Open. In 2004, Henin won the Gold Medal at the Athens Olympics to go along with her first Australian Open title. She won seven Grand Slam titles in her career, but she retired abruptly in 2008 citing burnout from over 20 years of competitive tennis. A brief comeback in 2010 was short lived, and she retired for good in early 2011.Venus WilliamsBy Sascha Wenninger via Wikimedia commonsIf not for having to compete against her sister Serena, Venus Williams may very well have had many more Grand Slam titles to her name. The sisters have gone head-to-head in a Grand Slam final nine times with Serena winning seven of those matches.While Venus’s career has been fraught with injuries, there is no doubt that in the early 2000s she was the woman to beat on tour. Between 2000 and 2001, Venus captured four of her seven Grand Slam victories. In 2002, she finally attained the number one ranking in the world, a spot she would capture on three separate occasions. Wimbledon has been Venus’ favorite court as she has won five titles there, the last coming in 2008.Billie Jean KingBill DeGiulioWho can forget the weird and wacky battle of the sexes between Billie Jean King and Bobby Riggs in 1973? Not only did King dispose of Mr. Riggs in short order but she also dominated women’s tennis from the mid-1960s to the mid-1970s.Her hard-charging aggressive style of play was in sharp contrast to the stately ground game of Chris Evert who came along in 1972 to challenge King as the queen of women’s tennis. Nevertheless, King owned Wimbledon from 1966 to 1975, when she won the title six times.Monica SelesBy http://www.flickr.com/photos/madmarlin via Wikimedia CommonsWere it not for the unfortunate on-court attack and stabbing by a deranged fan in 1993, Monica Seles would certainly have gone on to win more Grand Slam titles. Her epic battles with Steffi Graf were classics, and we the fans were deprived of some great matches because of one fan's sick obsession.While Monica did return to tennis two years after the incident, she was never quite the same. To her credit, she did go on to win the 1996 Australian Open, her only post-attack Grand Slam victory. Monica continued to play until 2003 and officially retired in 2008.There is no doubt that Monica Seles was the most dominant player from 1990 to 1992. During this time, she won seven of her nine Grand Slam Titles. In 1991, she was the top-ranked woman in the world.Chris EvertBill DeGiulioWas there ever a player more graceful on the court than Chris Evert? She was a machine from the baseline, and with that two-handed backhand shot, she dominated women’s tennis from the mid-1970s into the early 1980s. Evert still holds the record for reaching the most Grand Slam singles finals with 34, and she managed to win 18 of them, including every major at least twice. When Martina Navratilova came along in the late 1970s, it provided fans with a great on-court rivalry. Evert was the year-ending number one player in the world for seven years and had a career winning percentage in singles matches of over 90 percent.Margaret CourtBy Verhoeff, Bert  via Wikimedia commonsThere are many experts out there who feel that Margaret Court is the best player of all time. With a record 24 Grand Slam singles titles, it’s hard to argue. Add in her 19 doubles and 19 mixed doubles titles and Court has a record 62 Major titles to her credit.She was the first woman in the Open Era to win the singles Grand Slam in 1970, and she is one of only two women (Daniela Hantuchova being the other) to have won a Grand Slam in mixed doubles, which she did twice. Undoubtedly the best player in the 1960s to early 1970s, Court was the first woman to incorporate weights and fitness training into her routine. The result was a long and injury-free career.Martina NavratilovaWikimedia CommonsOne of the toughest competitors to ever grace the court, Martina Navratilova dominated women’s tennis from the late 1970s through a good portion of the 1980s. Known for her extreme physical conditioning, Martina brought the big serve and volley back to the women’s game.She holds the Open Era record for career titles with 167 and has 59 total Grand Slam titles, which includes singles, doubles, and mixed doubles. Martina also holds the record for career Wimbledon titles with an amazing nine championships. She will be remembered as one of the greatest doubles players ever, having won 31 Grand Slam Doubles titles and 10 Grand Slam Mixed Doubles titles.Steffi GrafChris Eason, Public Domain, via Wikimedia CommonsAble to win on all surfaces, Graff was a model of consistency throughout her 17-year career. Her record 377 weeks ranked as number one in the world is a record for any player, male or female. In 1988, Graff became the first player to achieve what is regarded as the calendar year Golden Slam by winning all four majors plus the Olympic Gold Medal in the same year, a remarkable feat.From the late 1980s to the mid-1990s, there was no one better than Graf, and when she retired in 1999, she was still ranked number three in the world. Were it not for the long and storied career of Serena Williams, the case would be made for Graf as the greatest of all time. While many will continue to debate Steffi versus Serena as the greatest female player of all time, they were both incredible players who dominated their era and advanced women's tennis.Serena WilliamsBy Sascha Wenninger, Melbourne, Australia via Wikimedia commonsOne of the strongest and most powerful women to ever play the game, Serena Williams has certainly left her mark on tennis. Together, Serena and her sister, Venus, have been a dominant force in women’s tennis since the late 1990s. Together, they have won 14 Grand Slam Doubles titles. With 23 Grand Slam Singles titles, including the 2017 Australian Open, Serena now owns the Open Era record for Grand Slam singles titles by a tennis player, male or female.Serena’s game has certainly withstood the test of time and competition. Her Grand Slam titles have come over an 18-year period starting in 1999, with her latest victory coming at the 2017 Australian Open. Out of competitive tennis for most of 2017 while pregnant, Serena has now reached 4 Grand Slam finals without securing that coveted 24th title. Making it to the 2018 and 2019 Wimbledon and US Open finals was certainly a step in the right direction and everything points to Serena remaining competitive despite turning 40 in 2021.I believe the case can now be made to elevate Serena to the greatest female tennis player of all time. Her high level of play over a very long career combined with her 23-10 record in Grand Slam finals certainly makes the case convincing. No disrespect to Steffi, Martina, and Margaret, but Serena now deserves the distinction as greatest of all time.Question: Who is the only woman tennis player to win 20 titles before the age of 18?Answer: I believe that would be Martina Hingis.Question: Why isn't Margaret Court number one on your list? She still has the best record with 24 Grand Slams and 194 titles.Answer: Margaret Court was a great player, dominant in her era, but I don't feel that she is the greatest of all-time.  Even though she was one of the first players to incorporate fitness training into her regimen, I just feel that there are a few players who should be ranked higher.  It's always difficult to compare players from different eras, and certainly, Court is one of the greatest of all-time, but I think the likes of Serena Williams, Steffi Graf and even Martina Navratilova were just as athletic and skilled.  I will say that after reviewing her career, I do plan to bump Court up to the number four position ahead of Chris Evert.
Question: Why isn't Kim Clijsters on the list of greatest women's tennis players?Answer: I think Kim Clijsters is more of a top 20 all-time player.  No disrespect to her wonderful tennis career, she was a great player, but the top 10 might be a reach.  Question: Is Martina Hingis in 11th place?Answer: I will be updating the list after the U.S. Open and yes, Martina Hingis will be on the list.Question: Who to date is the youngest grand slam winner?Answer: The youngest Grand Slam winner to date is Martina Hingis, who was 15 years and nine months old when she won the 1996 Wimbledon Doubles Championship playing with Helena Sukova.  She then became the youngest Grand Slam singles champ at 16 years and 117 days old when she won the 1997 Australian Open.Question: Who is the best women's tennis player of all time?Answer: For me, it has been either Serena Williams or Steffi Graf for quite awhile now, with an edge to Serena.Question: Why is Maria Sharapova not in the list of greatest women's tennis players?Answer: Maria Sharapova has had a great career so far, but with only five Grand Slam titles I don’t think she has cracked the upper echelon of all-time greats.  She is 2-19 in head-to-head matches against Serena Williams and has been ranked number 1 in the world for just 21 weeks. Indeed a formidable player, but with so many great players over just the last fifty years, I think Sharapova is more a top 15 all-time player.Question: Which female tennis players won Grand Slam titles from behind the baseline?Answer: Most of the women's Grand Slam titles have been won from behind the baseline.  The exceptions might be Margaret Court, Billie Jean King, and Martina Navratilova who all had more of an attacking game.  Chris Evert to Steffi Graff and even the Williams sisters have all played predominately from behind the baseline. Even Monica Seles, Martina Hingis, Evonne Goolagong, Maria Sharapova, and Justine Henin have all, for the most part, won Grand Slam titles with a ground game from behind the baseline.  I think the better question might be who have won Grand Slams with an attacking game as there are certainly fewer of them.Question: Is Serena Williams really coming back?  She’s canceled a number of tournaments.Answer: At the moment, I believe the plan is still for Serena Williams to return to competitive tennis.  She has canceled a few tournaments recently because she has not felt that she is fully ready to compete at the highest level.Question: So who is currently the best active female tennis player?Answer: That would be Serena Williams.Question: Hasn't Serena faced tougher competition than most other women's tennis players?Answer: Maybe early in her career she faced tougher competition with the likes of sister Venus Williams, Justine Henin, and Martina Hingis, but the last 8 to 10 years the competition has been less than stellar.  What is currently missing in women’s tennis is that great rivalry between two top players.  I see no other current player who can consistently challenge Serena when she is healthy.  That will certainly change with time as Serena gets older, but who is the next great player to replace Serena?  No one jumps out in my opinion.Question: What about Maria Bueno? Does she belong in the top 10 women's tennis players all-time?Answer: Maria Bueno had a great career that included winning 7 Grand Slam singles titles, 3 Wimbledon and 4 US Open .  She is one of two women from South America to be inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame along with Gabriela Sabatini.  With her 63 career titles came a World Number 1 ranking in 1959 and 1960.  While a case can certainly be made to include Bueno in the top 10 all-time, I think that she falls into the top 10 to 15 all-time ranking. She was certainly a great player who dominated women's tennis during the late 1950s to mid 1960s.Question: Margaret Court has 24 grand slams to Serena William’s 23, but above it states Serena has the most?Answer: Serena Williams has the most in the Open Era while Margaret Court has the most all-time.Question: Why is Simona Halep not on the list? She may not have won many grand slams, but she will be the player with the longest ever run in top 10?Answer: Simona needs a few more big time wins in Grand Slam events.  I love her game, but she is not quite to the top 10 all-time yet.  At 28 years of age she still has time to leave her mark on the game.  I hope she gets there.Question: How long has Serena Williams played tennis professionally?Answer: Serena Williams turned professional in October of 1995 at the age of 14.  Her first professional event was at the Bell Challenge in Quebec, Canada where she lost in the first round.Question: Recently, Bianca Andreescu went 17 straight tennis matches without losing.  Who holds the female record for this?Answer: I believe Martina Navratilova holds the record for the longest female winning streak with 74 consecutive singles wins in 1984.© 2013 Bill De GiulioJoey on September 20, 2020:Pierre dear you are right. Hingis was too young to understand that at the time. Sometimes success makes you think invincible. But i consider her to be one of the Greatest. She had her own style her own charizma. Hingis was a delight while manoeuvring in court.Pierre on September 18, 2020:The French crowd at Roland Garros do not condone unacceptable on court behaviour. Every top professional tennis player gets bad line calls. Technology has improved nowadays but the French Open has remained the same, with the checking of the mark. Hingis thought the umpire checked the wrong mark and became angry. It was a learning experience for Hingis and quite unnecessary, as she was leading 6-4, 2-0 against Graf. Had she kept her cool, she may have gone on to win her only French Open title. It’s the one that definitely got away from Hingis. Instead, the French crowd became unruly and Hingis was then playing against Graf and the crowd, a virtually impossible task to overcome.Referee on September 18, 2020:Another thing about Hingis. Hingis was not going to attend the after match presentation of the French Open in 1999, because she was so upset with the umpire. Luckily, her mother dragged her back for the presentation. Zero sportsmanship = Zero respect for HingisJoey’s brother on September 18, 2020:I don’t care which country Hingis is from. You must not call your opponent half a man. You must not spit the dummy and have a meltdown at a bad line call in the French Open Final, which she lost. Hingis must grow up.Nostradamus on September 18, 2020:By 2030, Bianca Andreescu, Ashleigh Barty and Naomi Osaka will all be on the list for the top 10 Greatest Women’s Tennis Player List Of All Time.The GOAT police on September 18, 2020:To quote the disrespectful Shihska, go somewhere else if you want to keep mentioning your favourites! We are dealing with the greatest of all time, not the favourites of all time.Captain Kangaroo on September 18, 2020:Joey, Hingis is the one of the most overrated tennis player of all time. She did not achieve enough in Grand Slam singles. She was an underachiever. As this article is about the greatest, not the favourites (just look at the more intelligent tennis readers on greatest men’s of all time who correctly keep mentioning greatest, not favourites, yes I think you and others are stupid to keep saying favourites), I shall continually have a go at anyone who says favourites that aren’t the greatest. You might think you are being funny, but I also thrive on your lack of tennis intelligence! May long the greatest be the greatest number of Grand Slam singles titles. Only the greatest female tennis players are the winners. Alexandra knows her tennis. Joey does not.Tennis Expert on September 18, 2020:Poor Hingis fans, Hingis is 2 Grand Slam singles titles behind the great Evonne Goolagong Cawley. Completely biased author who bowed to pressure to put Hingis equal with Evonne. Absolutely, loved Evonne Goolagong’s game. Goolagong Cawley was a Champion that I would put above Hingis every day of the week.Margaret Court is the greatest and the best! on September 18, 2020:My favourite has been the brilliant champion Margaret Court, the greatest number of Grand Slam singles titles, the greatest number of Grand Slam doubles titles and the greatest number of Grand Slam mixed doubles. Special mention to the magnificent Monica Seles.Joey on September 18, 2020:My favorite had been the Swiss Miss Martina Hingis.Alexandra on September 17, 2020:Margaret Court.... G. O. A. TTy roderick on September 13, 2020:Here its 3rd major win for Naomi..... Hope there will be many more.... Another great in making indeed.Harry on September 12, 2020:There’s no such thing as a greatest player of all time. You cannot compare different eras. You can only go by who wins the greatest number of singles titles. Anyone who says otherwise is talking complete nonsense!Brett on September 12, 2020:Ty, apparently it’s not bad to say anything bad about any achiever. There was one guy on the greatest men’s player of any time, not me, who claimed Nadal and Djokovic were cheating. People unfortunately can say what they like if they strongly believe it and there’s nothing we can do about it.Colin on September 12, 2020:Congratulations Naomi Osaka on winning the 2020 US Open and your 3rd Grand Slam singles title. This young lady has the potential to be one of the all the time great female tennis players in 10 years time, if she stays relatively free of major injuries and keeps up her motivation. Her next goals must be to win Wimbledon and the French Open. She definitely has the game as do her rivals in Ashley Barty and Bianca Andreescu.Ty Roderick on September 12, 2020:I loved Martina Hingis's game... She was a great champion. No offence but its bad to say negative things about any achiever. Another great in making is Naomi osaka.... Keeping fingers crossed for US 2020Ivan on September 10, 2020:Using the Vaani method, Vaani you forgot to mention Maria Sharapova in the Serena Williams era. Pay attention Vaani. Sharapova also won 5 Grand Slam singles titles in a much tougher era than Hingis. Sharapova won every Grand Slam singles title. Hingis won her Grand Slam singles titles after Seles was stabbed and Graf was her only main competition. Navratilova and Evert were past their peak and the Williams sisters were only starting. Sharapova won her 5 Grand Slam singles titles in the era where the Williams sisters were at their peak, as well as Henin, Davenport, Clijsters and more recently when Kerber, Maguruzza and Halep were top players.Vince on September 10, 2020:Come on Vaani, it’s insane to give Hingis an era to herself. She doesn’t deserve it. What is your definition of an era? It’s a generation of at least 20 years. Very biased indeed you are. Do more thorough research than that and come back to us.Tenys on September 10, 2020:Steffi Graf, the most overrated player of all time. She’s only there as high as she was ranked because she made the most of the Seles stabbing.Jeremy on September 10, 2020:Pathetic choice to put Hingis on the top 10 list. So many other players deserve to be there and not Hingis. She could not absorb power. She gave it up in the end because she couldn’t handle the strength of the powerful players. How dare Hingis have the audacity to call Amelie Mauresmo half a man! Shame on you Hingis! Absolutely zero respect for Hingis. No credit at all because no credit is due. All credit to the opponents of Hingis.Brett on September 10, 2020:What’s so good about Hingis? 5 measly Grand Slam singles titles, no French Open. Stop mentioning your favourites. The majority of readers are only interested in the greatest. There is a big difference. Get over it, Hingis fans.WillieT77 on September 07, 2020:So the person who actually wins the most isn't the best here? Alternative facts apparently being used as the criteria. Margret Court is the best. That is the record Serena is currently in pursuit of. When or maybe if Serena beats her record she will be the best possibly. But she still would have a ways to go to get her combined doubles and mixed doubles total record.Monite on September 06, 2020:Angelique kerber.... I hope she wins US open 2020..... She is also a great playerTennis Historian on August 26, 2020:Shiksha, I have MUCH more knowledge about Tennis than you. You, Shiksha, have absolutely no evidence to back up your claims, where as I do. I rest my case. Another totally inaccurate and totally unacceptable statement from you! My friends and I are laughing profusely at your lack of tennis knowledge. We are all happy to debate with you any issue you want about tennis. Let the games begin Shiksha, and the winner is Tennis Historian.Shiksha on August 25, 2020:Everybody pleaseeeee clap for Self proclaimed TENNIS HISTORIAN... Who has NO SENSE OF TENNIS(just like me lolx). PityTennis Historian on August 24, 2020:Another thing Shiksha, don’t jump to conclusions. We can be a figure of speech, or agreeing with other people who have a similar opinion to us. For example, Shiksha, Ash Barty in all her press conferences says We not I. How would you like it Shiksha if I accused you, Arivinder, Tashbi and Surya of being the same person?Tennis Historian on August 24, 2020:Favourite player or not, I will keep arguing and debating the issue that Maria Sharapova has won the same number of Grand Slam singles titles, 5, as Martina Hingis. Maria Sharapova won every Grand Slam singles title, whereas Hingis did not win the French Open. The measure of greatness is winning every Grand Slam singles title on every surface and nothing you will say will convince me otherwise.Tennis Historian on August 24, 2020:Shishka, you like to quote Asad. Well I like to quote the respected WESLEY IVAN HORSKINS, who has the selection criteria for the greatest female tennis player absolutely correct.Tennis Historian on August 24, 2020:Shishka, I stand by my comment regarding Sharapova. She has won every Grand Slam singles title on every surface, whereas Hingis has not. That’s common knowledge. It has nothing to do with favourites, otherwise I would mention the likes of Wozniacki, Radwanska, etc, who have won 1 and no Grand Slam titles respectively. As for your disrespectful comment about a thesis, many times people have come back to me, stating where is your evidence to back up your claims.Neville on August 24, 2020:Hey Shishka, you don’t scare us one bit! We are all entitled to our own opinion. We said we don’t agree with you. We’re not going away Shishka. We never said you didn’t agree with the author. What do you know about tennis, Shishka? What’s your background?William on August 24, 2020:Why not have our own opinion, Shishka, if we disagree with the rankings? We believe several players were hard done by and will continue to defend them, while we maintain strong views about the issue. Shishka, you need to realise that whether it’s me, the author, you, or anyone else compiling the list of the greatest female tennis players, there will always be people who have different opinions. That’s a fact of life. Many things in life are open to debate. Just have a look at the corresponding article of the greatest male tennis players of all time, where people have continually mounted their cases for either Nadal, Laver, Djokovic or Federer for being the greatest male player of all time.Shiksha on August 24, 2020:Isn't it strange that All  5 recent comments are time compressed and stating same thing in same words... Shiksha you don't know tennis We or I should say 'I' know tennis better.... Because it seems to me the same person has written all comments or persuaded his pals to write... Lolx anyways who soever you are man go get a life... As you said everyone is ENTITLED for his/her opinion so did I. I agree with authors list. By the way when you Dnt agree then why you bother to waste time here... Mr Donald paul gary... LolxShiksha on August 24, 2020:Mr Tennis Historian.... You know its quite evident that you are also doing wt m saying...just picking up your favourites.... Who cd have imagined putting sharapova with likes of Seles and Court.... Sharapova is no where close to those greats or even close to Serena or Henin. But yes since she is your favorite like mine is Graff so its gud for you to keep wherever you want to keep on your list. Thats my point and i was referring to someone whi Said list is not appropriate.... So Mr Bill has atleast stated his reasons with his list and we should appreciate that. That was my point. You did not need to write   whole thesis just to say you like sharapova. You like her so be it. No problem.Tennis Historian on August 24, 2020:Shishka, I think you’re missing the point. Although I, like others, happen to like Monica Seles, Maria Sharapova and Margaret Court, I could name you so many other favourite female tennis players of mine that wouldn’t get anywhere near the list of the top 10 greatest female tennis players. Therefore, I choose not to name them because they are nowhere near the greatest. I think people have made very good cases for those above 3 named players to be ranked higher than they should.It’s never been about because they’re my favourite players, this is where they should be ranked. It’s always been about looking at the appropriate Grand Slam singles statistics, not who I like to watch the most and who is my favourite.Many of my favourite female tennis players have never even won a Grand Slam singles title. People like myself, are well aware that you will have always have people agreeing or disagreeing with you. Everyone is entitled to their own opinion and everyone is free to agree or disagree with anyone else’s opinion, including the author.As has been mentioned before, there are no awards given out to the greatest female tennis player of all time, as it’s impossible to compare different eras. Trophies and recognition however are given out to the winners of all Grand Slam tournaments.Shishka, we will keep going on about Grand Slam titles because the article is about the GREATEST female tennis players of all time, not the favourite female tennis players of all time. Believe me, Shishka, Grand Slam titles won is the main focus of determining who is the greatest.By the way Shishka, since you come across as having strong views, what do you think should be the criteria for determining the greatest female tennis players of all time?Massive fan of Margaret Court on August 24, 2020:Hey Shishka, Margaret Court is the greatest female tennis player of all time!Donald on August 24, 2020:Give us a break Shishka. So you’re telling me that you always have to agree with every article you read. Come on, Shishka, use your common sense. You know very well that you don’t have to agree with everything you read. Shishka, just because someone has bothered to do research does not mean they are right with their rankings. It was the author’s opinion and people are ABSOLUTELY entitled to have their own opinion about the rankings. Tyrone did do his own list anyway. People are absolutely entitled to DISAGREE with you and the top 10 rankings if they feel strongly about it.Paul on August 24, 2020:Poor Shishka! You’ve woken up the wrong side of bed! I had to laugh out loud at your comment. For someone, who thinks tennis is a game, you seem very offended. Tyrone was simply agreeing with Wesley’s comment. Your comment, Shishka, was totally unwarranted and totally acceptable.Gary on August 24, 2020:Hey Shishka, we have got an opinion just like you. Too bad you don’t agree because we certainly don’t agree with you. I could not care less who your favourite players are. What do you really know about tennis Shishka? You don’t seem to understand the issues of what constitutes a great tennIs player.John Mac on August 24, 2020:Where’s your logic Shiksha? You cannot be serious! Grand Slam singles titles are what separates the best from the rest. Tennis is more than a game. It’s a professional sport taken seriously by the players. Grand Slam titles are what the best players in the world strive for. It’s what they’re remembered for long after they’ve retired. Novak Djokovic for example in the men’s is playing in next week’s US Open so he can catch up to Federer’s Grand Slam singles title record. Likewise, Serena Williams who is aiming to catch up to Margaret Court’s Grand Slam singles record. Shishka, if you had bothered to follow what Djokovic said in the media a few days ago, he admitted that was a reason he was playing in the US Open, when so many other top players have withdrawn due to the coronavirus. We think you have the problem and we have the common sense, not you. You stop criticising us.Harold on August 24, 2020:Disagree entirely with you Shikska. Grand Slam titles mean everything! We can point fingers as much we like. We disagree with you and the author.Shiksha on August 23, 2020:I think Tennis is a game and Grand Slams are mere tournaments like all other tennis tournaments.. So one could not base his opinion over Grand slams only... Common sense demands  that in order to chose greatest you have to look for everything for a player not just his or her performance in one particular aspect... So please stop beating about the bush of Grand slams.. And what author / admin has taken into consideration to make this list must be appreciated rather than pointing fingers. If you have problems go and make your own list who is stopping anyone. Yes your opinion as to your favorites is regarded.... As my Favorites are Chris Evert, Steffi Graff and Martina Hingis.Tyrone on August 23, 2020:Wesley makes a great point. Margaret Court is definitely the greatest female tennis player of all time. Although I disagreed with Seles being ranked as low as she was at number 6, at least the author used a subjective opinion by putting Seles above Billie Jean King, who won more Grand Slam singles titles than Seles, due to the horrific incident Seles had to ensure, and Seles would have definitely passed Billie Jean King on Grand Slam singles titles, otherwise.However, using Wesley’s theory, Evonne Goolagong Cawley, who won 7 Grand Slam singles titles, should have stayed as a clear number 10, not to be equally shared with Hingis, who only won 5 Grand Slam singles titles.In fact using Wesley’s theory, this should be the real the top 10 list and it’s not as kind to Monica Seles, but can be adjusted due to circumstances.The author obviously has little regard for the Grand Slam singles records of past players, perhaps because he wasn’t around to see them play or there’s limited vision of them, but as Wesley noted, the Grand Slam singles records are there for a reason, and the number of Grand Slam singles titles won are what constitutes greatness. Since many of these players played a long time ago, they must not be penalised or disregarded as the modern day players have a bigger advantage nowadays with the quality of the racquets, professional, fitness and other resources made available to them. These champions from the amateur eras would have certainly benefited too from these things, had they been playing now.Here is the list of the most Grand Slam singles titles won by females:1. Margaret Court 242. Serena Williams 233. Steffi Graf 224. Helen Wills 195. Martina Navratilova 18Chris Evert 187. Billie Jean King 128. Maureen Connolly 9Monica Seles 910. Molla Mallory 8Suzanne Lenglen 8WESLEY IVAN HORSKINS on August 22, 2020:There is only one way of assessing success objectively apart from bringing in subjective opinions and that is the amount of Grand Slams [the pinnacle of our game]. Simply Margaret Court is the winner. Otherwise why bother playing them if one can pick and choose what ones matter, and, what ones don't!Jimmy on August 21, 2020:The Tennis Expert made some very good points about Margaret Court’s Grand Slam singles, doubles and mixed doubles record. He is also right about the points he made about Seles, Graf and Sharapova. I know Seles did not win Wimbledon but she could have, if not for the stabbing. I just also wanted to mention that the years that Monica Seles was unfortunately robbed of her playing in her peak years due to that awful incident reminds me of Rod Laver, who won a calendar men’s Grand Slam in both 1962 and 1969. From 1963 to 1968 inclusive, he wasn’t allowed to play in any Grand Slam tournament because he turned professional. They were his peak years from 1962 to 1968. What both Seles and Laver still achieved in Grand Slam tournaments without those peak years being counted due to those circumstances, is truly phenomenal.The point I’m trying to make is that rather than counting just the total number of Grand Slam titles won, although it’s justified with the likes of Margaret Court, Martina Navratilova and Serena Williams, there must be factors taken into account, as mentioned with the likes of Monica Seles and Rod Laver, when determining the overall rankings of the greatest tennis players of all time. Also, the quality of opposition Graf was left with after Seles’ stabbing and the quality of opponent that Seles was beating in Grand Slam singles finals in Graf, before that shocking incident.Tennis Expert on August 21, 2020:I totally disagree with Tashbi. The author has done a very bad job. Although he raised Margaret Court from Number 6 to Number 4, Margaret Court should be Number 1 for her record in Grand Slam singles, Grand Slam doubles and Grand Slam doubles. Steffi Graf is way too high at number 2, as she had it much easier after Seles was stabbed. Seles was on target to be the greatest Grand Slam singles of all time and should be higher than Number 6. Maria Sharapova should be in the top 10 list, as she is one if only 10 female tennis players of all time to have won every Grand Slam title on every surface. The true measure of greatness is to win every Grand Slam singles title in an era where Serena Williams dominated. Maria Sharapova did just that and must recognised accordingly.Tashbi on August 21, 2020:I totally agree with the List of author. He has valid research background and has elaborated facts with his Ranking. Bravo Mr Bill. Good jobNida on August 20, 2020:Hello.. I am fan of both Seles and Hingis. I don't know much about tennis but during my childhood i used to watch on tele matches between these two. I really loved watching them special thing about Seles was at end of match she was always cheerful. And special about Hingis was she made lot less noises while playing... Although not very tennis professional observations but grant me the liberty as i used to watch for fun. Lolx.Jamie on August 18, 2020:Althea Gibson? anyone?Warren on August 17, 2020:I completely agree with you Ted that Monica Seles was a class above Martina Hingis as a Grand Slam singles  player and therefore ranked higher than Hingis as an all time great player. However, as an absolutely massive Monica Seles fan, I was very shocked to read that Hingis had a 15-5 winning record against Seles.However, although I am giving Hingis credit for mentioning this head to head record, the 1st meeting between Seles and Hingis started in 1996, not long after Seles won her last Grand Slam singles title in the Australian Open, taking her tally to 9.The point I want to make is that although Seles was playing well after a remarkable comeback, her level of play, which was understandable, was not the same as it was after winning her last Australian Open due to the horrific stabbing back when she was at her absolute peak during the years 1990 to 1993.It was unbelievable that she did manage to win 1 Grand Slam singles title after that terrible incident.We will never unfortunately really know how the great Monica Seles would have become, but if her form from 1990 to 1993 in which she won 8 Grand Slam singles titles by the age of 19, she could have easily ended up as close to if not the greatest female Grand Slam singles player of all time. Monica Seles,  I salute you as a very worthy champion and one of the all time greatest female tennis players.Mike on August 17, 2020:I read a lot of comments here... Certainly sharapova fans seem to have emerged all at once... Or there is a set of fans right now active atleast. Because apart from few recent posts i could hardly see sharapova's name... Not to be offended please... Lolx. Anyways Don't forget Greats like Devenport and Clijsters.... I must say Lindsay Devenport was a class player and a very humble human being. Always loved to see her greet with utmost sportsmanship at end of every match irrespective of the result.Ted on August 16, 2020:The reason why this whole debate about Maria Sharapova being a better Grand Slam singles player than Hingis started was 4 weeks ago when Asad made a ridiculous comment in this article that Seles and Hingis were players of century. Seles of course was because she was on target to be the greatest female player of all time before she was stabbed, having won 8 Grand Slam singles titles at the age of 19 and then another Grand Slam singles title after her amazing comeback.Hingis certainly cannot be mentioned in the same breath as Seles, who was a much better player than Hingis. Everyone else that was mentioned in the top 10 greatest female players of all time absolutely deserved to be ranked above Hingis. Therefore, because Asad put Hingis above every other top 10 greatest female tennis player, except Seles, upset many people. That is why people thought to themselves, if Asad can outrageously claim Hingis as a player of the century, then certainly Maria Sharapova can be mentioned as being a better Grand Slam singles player than Hingis to point out how absurd his claim was. By the way, I am one of those who agree that Maria Sharapova was a better Grand Slam singles player than Martina Hingis because of their respective Grand Slam singles records.Peter on August 16, 2020:Maria Sharapova also had a winning 2-1 head to head record against Martina Hingis in singles.Brad on August 16, 2020:Arivinder, you must agree that if we are just comparing the Grand Slam singles career only of Maria Sharapova and Martina Hingis, Maria Sharapova must come out on top for winning 5 Grand Slam singles on all surfaces compared to Martina Hingis, whose 5 Grand Slam singles titles did not include the French Open on clay.Larry on August 16, 2020:Of course, Sharapova was a better Grand Slam singles player than Hingis. The tennis history book records do not lie. Sharapova won every Grand Slam title on all surfaces. Hingis did not. You and other Hingis fans must accept that reality. Congratulations Maria Sharapova on a wonderful tennis career! Number 1 in the world does not mean much when Caroline Wozniacki was Number 1 in the world for nearly 2 years and only won 1 Grand Slam title. Arivinder, to be one of the all time greats, you need to win Grand Slam titles on ALL surfaces! Maria Sharapova did that. Hingis did not. That is why Maria Sharapova is an all time great AHEAD of Hingis. Once again, we’re not going mad. We’re stating the FACTS of both player’s Grand Slam singles careers and the criteria required to be regarded as one of the all time greats. Arivinder, almost winnng the French a Open is not good enough. Maria Sharapova won the French Open twice and had a much tougher era against Serena Williams at her peak than the era when Hingis was at her peak.Arvinder on August 16, 2020:Whoa whoa whoa.... People supporting Ms Sharapova have gone nuts... Or so called desperate to press upon Sharapova's worth..... NO WAY that she was better than Hingis.... So please calm down. Oh i just heard Hingis was No 1 for 209 weeks and Sharapova whatttttttt... 17.... Hingis almost made 1999 French open but fate had something else enstore for her. Oh heard again Hingis was No1 simultaneously both in singles and doubles.... Ohh Hingis Head to Head against Williams is almost equal and williams devoured Sharapova dont know how manyyyyy times.... Any count?Moderator on August 15, 2020:I used to go for Hingis and wanted Hingis to beat Graf in that French Open Final. However, after that match, I lost all respect for Hingis for her bad sportsmanship, which the French crowd certainly let her know about.Also, I used to go for Federer, and was happy that he broke Sampras’ Grand Slam singles record. However, I felt he was dominating too much and playing for too long that I simply fell in love with the fighting spirit of Nadal and want Nadal to overtake Federer on Grand Slam singles titles won. So much so, that I always barrack for Djokovic to beat Federer in Grand Slam singles finals, so that Federer doesn’t go too far ahead of Nadal.The point I’m trying to make is that everyone will have any reason to go for a particular player over another and even change from one player to another. The guy who ridiculously accused Nadal of cheating in the corresponding article for the greatest male tennis players of all time, claimed he used to go for Nadal. Therefore, people have the strangest reasons why they go for a particular player or not, and whether or not we agree or disagree with them is just their opinion against our opinion.Stats Man on August 15, 2020:Sourya, we are not disputing what you are saying, but you still must acknowledge that Maria Sharapova’s Grand Slam singles record  overall is better than Hingis’. Yes, Hingis was a better Grand Slam doubles player than Sharapova because Sharapova never played Grand Slam doubles. We are simply talking about who was a better Grand Slam singles player out of Sharapova and Hingis and you have to say Sharapova’s 5 Grand Slam singles on all surfaces outweighs Hingis’ 5 Grand Slam singles titles, but not on clay. We don’t care who people vote for, we are just making a comparison of their Grand Slam singles record.Capriatimania on August 15, 2020:Hey Hingis fans, you obviously forgot to mention the fact Martina Hingis lost to the great Jennifer Capriati twice in a row in the Australian Open Final in the early 2000s, the same Grand Slam tournament that Hingis won 3 times!What a great player Jennifer Capriati must have been to beat the absolutely overrated Martina Hingis! Hingis fans, you forgot to mention that in the 1999 French Open Final, the crowd turned on Hingis for her bad sportsmanship and supported Graf to win that match, which Graf did. Yeah, Hingis can do no wrong in your eyes but believe me, Hingis is no angel.Raphael on August 15, 2020:Surya and others, you need to know we’re not going out of our way to say bad things about Hingis. You don’t seem to realise that we are acknowledging than Hingis has won 5 Grand Slam singles titles. It’s simply saying that Sharapova has a better Grand Slam singles record in comparison.What you have previously read is so trivial in comparison to what I read on the corresponding greatest male tennis players of all time, where one reader ridiculously claimed that Nadal and Djokovic were cheating and that reader gave no credit whatsoever to Nadal and Djokovic winning their Grand Slam singles titles in a much shorter timeframe than Federer and in a much tougher era than when Federer started, so I know what it’s like to have other readers treating your favourite players unfairly.But rest assured, we are simply making a comparison between the Grand Slam singles record of Maria Sharapova and Martina Hingis. We think it’s unfair that Maria Sharapova was not included on the list. To be clear, we are not trying to destroy the character or tennis career of Martina Hingis. It’s only to say that Maria Sharapova has had a better overall Grand Slam singles career than Martina Hingis.Experienced Tennis Observer on August 15, 2020:I thought Aggie Radwanska was an absolute joy and the best female player to watch for her game but I’m not saying how great she was because of her Grand Slam singles record. Her best performance in a Grand Slam singles match was a runner up at Wimbledon.There is a big difference between having a great game to watch and being an all time great player. Djokovic has a much worse game to watch than Federer, yet Djokovic has a much better head to head record against Federer overall and in Grand Slam matches. It’s all about getting the job done consistently, not who has the best game to watch. Grand Slam singles statistics mean everything. Therefore, while Martina Hingis’ game may have been more interesting to watch than Maria Sharapova, the REALITY is both players ended up with 5 Grand Slam singles titles each. However, the fact that Maria Sharapova won Grand Slam singles titles on all surfaces, 2 French Opens, 1 US Open, 1 Australian Open and 1 Wimbledon, compared to Hingis, 3 Australian Opens, 1 US Open and 1 Wimbledon, without any French Open titles, means that Maria Sharapova has a greater overall Grand Slam singles record than Martina Hingis and should therefore be regarded as a greater female tennis player of all time than Martina Hingis. I use very appropriate statistical evidence to back up my claims, rather than mere words as to who has a better game to watch.Tennis Analyst on August 15, 2020:Maria Sharapova, a delight to watch. Seles, a delight to watch. Aggie Radwanska, a delight to watch. You weren’t reading properly. We never said anything bad about Hingis’ game. We said Sharapova’s Grand Slam singles record was better. I don’t care how good Hingis game’ was to watch or Federer. The facts are Hingis never won the French Open whereas Sharapova did. I don’t care how good Federer’s game was to watch. Nadal has only won 1 less Grand Slam title in 5 years less. We are talking about the best overall Grand Slam singles record on all surfaces for the greatest players of all time, not who was better to watch. Whatever you say, Maria Sharapova’s Grand Slam singles record is better overall than Martina Hingis, regardless of who is better to watch.Surya Vanshi on August 14, 2020:Martina Hingis, A delight to watch while she played. She managed to live upto the name Martina.... As she was named after Great Navratilova. As Billie King used to say No one uses her mind like Hingis on court. So my Vote is for Martina Hingis. And above all Hingis was a great doubles player as well and we here in India have massive respect for Hingis as she always paved way for her partners be it Sania, Paes. Kudos to her for that. So before saying bad about any player please learn they are favorite to someone for sure.Kevin on August 11, 2020:Lucky Joe, Harry did give credit to Martina Hingis saying she won 5 Grand Slam singles titles. He was giving you the facts. He was simply saying that Maria Sharapova’s 5 Grand Slam singles should be given more credit than Hingis because Hingis did not win the French Open, whereas Sharapova won every Grand Slam singles titles. They are the facts, not mere words, as you have described it as.The Voice of Reason on August 11, 2020:Lucky Joe, there’s one thing you should know. People will always have their favourites for whatever reason they choose and make a case for them, statistical or otherwise. People are allowed to disagree with you and vice versa. If you haven’t already looked at the corresponding Greatest Male Tennis Players of all time, the main candidates are Nadal, Federer and Djokovic. People who nominate Federer don’t have kind words to say about Nadal and Djokovic. People who nominate Nadal don’t have kind words to say about Federer and Djokovic. People who nominate Djokovic don’t have kind words to say about Nadal and Federer. It doesn’t necessarily mean that these people really dislike the others, or even if that’s the case, it’s just that they really like or regard highly the person or people they nominate as the greatest tennis players of all time. As to whether who’s right or not is each individual’s opinion only. No awards or trophies are given out for the greatest male or female tennis players as you cannot compare different eras. You can only go by their records and their competitors at that time.Harry on August 11, 2020:Lucky Joe, the main point I’m trying to make is that Maria Sharapova deserves to be ranked above Martina Hingis as an all time great. To me, I couldn’t care less who has less power or more power. If you go by their Grand Slam singles results, Maria Sharapova won every Grand Slam singles title whereas Hingis did not win the French Open. The true measure of greatness is winning Grand Slam singles titles on all surfaces and Maria Sharapova did just that. Don’t forget Lucky Joe that Maria Sharapova had to face Serena Williams at Serena Williams’ peak for her entire career. Don’t forget Lucky Joe that Maria Sharapova still managed to beat Serena Williams in the Wimbledon Final as a 17 year old when Serena Williams was at her peak. I could not care less who was number 1 more because Sharapova played in a tougher era. I am a massive Caroline Wozniacki fan, who won a Grand Slam singles title and was number 1 in the world for a long time in the Sharapova and Serena Williams era but I’m not saying how great she was because she only won 1 Grand Slam singles title. Grand Slam singles statistics is what I’m about, taking into account the level of competition, which is also why I don’t hold Steffi Graf highly because Seles was out of the picture after being stabbed. Yet Seles still won a Grand Slam singles title after that stabbing, which was truly brilliant.David on August 11, 2020:Lucky Joe, the issue is not absorbing power. The issue is who are the greatest female tennis players of all time. No credit to Hingis. I will always say that Sharapova was a a better Grand Slam singles player than Hingis because Hingis did not win every Grand Slam singles title whereas Sharapova did. Nothing you will say will change my mind. History has proven that, not your mere words. Hingis is not one of the greatest tennis players of all time. Also, Margaret Court won more Grand Slam titles than Navratilova in singles, doubles and mixed doubles.Mohn JcEnroe on August 11, 2020:Lucky Joe, You Cannot be Serious!Tom on August 11, 2020:Lucky Joe, we don’t rely on mere words. We rely on Grand Slam singles statistics as evidence, unlike yourself, who relies on mere words.Tennis Analyst on August 11, 2020:Lucky Joe, I completely disagree with you. Look up the Grand Slam singles records. Hingis won 5 Grand Slam singles titles but never won a French Open. She is NOT an all time great. Maria Sharapova won EVERY Grand Slam singles title. That is the true measure of greatness. Maria Sharapova is a better Grand Slam singles player than Hingis. Give Maria Sharapova credit where credit’s due. Margaret Court is the greatest tennis player of all time. Seles was on target to be the greatest winner of Grand Slam singles titles before being stabbed. Credit where credit’s due to Monica Seles. Yes, Seles never won Wimbledon but she could have. Congratulations Monica Seles on a magnificent tennis career.Lucky Joe on August 10, 2020:Hey Nick and Harry.... I don't think you have ever seen Hingis steering the ball against power hitters? Tennis is a game or TUG of war? Where power is everything.... Who so ever has mentioned Hingis as one of the greats i totally Agree with them... How can you say Nick that Hingis would lose her nerve against Williams when she has a equal winning streak against both and perhaps better when combined... Despite lack of power if she dominated tennis and for that matter gave William sisters a run for their money, she needs to be applauded.... And Harry Hingis has carved a niche in Tennis world which can't be denied by mere your words bro. So please learn to give credit where it is due. Rest i am always of the opinion that Navratilova was, is and will be Greatest of All until someone comes up with same level of consistency.Nick on August 06, 2020:Hingis would lose her shit when she came up against a power hitter in grand slam finals . She would lose all composure and I always thought she lost her nerve and was too afraid to get back to singles . When she was younger she was so precise and consistent but then players figured her out and they learnt to wear her down with power.  Seles what a tragedy she was easily better than Graf .   I remember seeing JUSTINE HENIN , dominate Serena when Serena was playing her best tennis.  A fit Justine was better than Serena .Harry on July 21, 2020:Asad, Maria Sharapova was a better singles player than Martina Hingis because Maria Sharapova won every Grand Slam singles title at least once. Martina Hingis never won the French Open. Maria Sharapova won Grand Slam singles titles in the French Open twice, Wimbledon once, the US Open once and the Australian Open once. Martina Hingis won Grand Slam singles titles in the Australian Open 3 times, Wimbledon once and the US Open once.Harry on July 21, 2020:Asaad, not Hingis. Seles yes. Margaret Court yes.Asad on July 16, 2020:Hingis and Seles were players of century...Tennis Expert on July 08, 2020:No way Jose! Monica Seles was a better player than Steffi Graf. Seles was consistently beating Graf in Grand Slam singles finals before Seles was stabbed. Graf had it easy when Seles was forced off the tour. Seles was on target to be the greatest female singles players of all time. The winner of the greatest female tennis player of all time is Margaret Court with 64 Grand Slam titles, including 24 in singles and 40 in doubles and mixed doubles inclusive.Nahithi on July 08, 2020:Martina Hingis and Martina Navratilova both were great playersJose on July 07, 2020:Steffi Graf is with no doubt about it the Best player of all time .grand slam and gold medal in the same year ???nobody else has done that..just one of Steffi great things she accomplished..so she is the greatest tennis player of all timeAnguth on June 08, 2020:I agree with Bundalo. Not only Evert but Seles also had short span, before her stabbing, to gain huge success even i agree with thise who say so for Hingis. Where as Serena having a Long span, power, built, fitness gadgets, advanced rackets should not be compared with all other greats. William sisters should have their own catagory.... Probably comprising of these two and few male players probably. No disrespect plzzz.... Infact its a way of respecting them in their own rightBundalo on June 08, 2020:You cannot go by feel, court earned her wins and in afar shorter period of time, serena is nasty, all this nonsense about her being big hearted, is bull, you saw how she abused that umpire, am glad that she was fined. Nevertheless, Court should retain her number 1 position because the statistics say so. Amen.Gulgi on June 05, 2020:Is power the criteria for being GOAT? Or is it the Game? In either of the cases Martina Hingis despite the fact that she lacked power had Great Game. She for me is GOAT. Petite, Frail, short heighted.... Yet Robust and a Champion..... HINGIS surely deserves applauseShami on June 03, 2020:Hingis was a great champion but lacked physical power. It's rare to see someone retiring at 22....she had a Seles effect. Seles had to leave due to stabbing and Hingis due to injuries and lack of power. As far as game and being a player is considered I think Hingis surely falls in top 5.Koha Tute'r on May 30, 2020:Marteena Hingis playing good game. Why she left early?Salem on May 20, 2020:I loved watching Hingis playing her clever game shotsRealist on May 17, 2020:In the end, it won’t matter what anyone says about the greatest female tennis player of all time. There are no awards given out for the greatest female tennis player of all time. You simply cannot compare different eras of tennis. When all these great players have retired, the history books will show who has won the greatest amount of Grand Slam singles titles and the greatest number of Grand Slam titles overall. What anyone says is irrelevant compared to history. The main awards are trophies given to players who have won Grand Slam titles.Harry kenzs on May 16, 2020:What is this obsession of people with Serena? I still Dnt get it... Why because she had a longer duration to play? More fitness gadgets to go with? How can somebody possibly put her ahead of Margaret court? And even Navratilova or Evert or Graff for that matter.... If you ask me I wd say Even Hingis and Henin gave Serena run for her money.... So stop beating about the bush and all those who did not even watch Margaret play are simply denying her greatness... As saying goes "out of sight out of mind".... Serena still playing so it's easy to get impressed but that doesn't make her Greatest of allDavid on May 15, 2020:After Margaret Court, who is the greatest female tennis player of all time with 64 Grand Slam titles (24 in singles, 19 in doubles and 21 in mixed doubles), the second greatest female tennis player of all time is Martina Navratilova, who has 59 Grand Slam titles (18 in singles, 31 in doubles, and 10 in mixed doubles).Jeremy on May 15, 2020:Another reason why Margaret Court is a greater tennis player than Serena Williams is that all of Margaret Court’s 24 Grand Slam singles titles were won over a 13 year period from 1960 to 1973, whereas all of Serena Williams’ 23 Grand Slam took 5 years longer to achieve than Margaret Court, from 1999 to 2017, an 18 year period. This is also why I think Monica Seles was one of the greatest players of all time, because she won 8 Grand Slam singles titles while she was still only 19 before tragedy struck. She could have been the greatest female tennis player of all time, with the greatest number of Grand Slam singles titles, if not for that horrific incident when she was only 19. Yet, she still managed to win 1 more Grand Slam singles title after that, a truly remarkable achievement.Don on May 15, 2020:Serve is not everything! Look at men’s tennis now. Federer, Djokovic, Nadal and Murray were not for their big serves. Margaret Court could play every shot extremely well. Her record alone in Grand Slam singles, Grand Slam doubles and Grand Slam mixed doubles makes her the greatest female tennis player of all time.Jeff on May 15, 2020:No distrespect to Serena, but she never had to play with a wooden racquet against the great Margaret Court!Goomba on May 15, 2020:With no disrespect to Margaret Court, but she never had to face serves from Serena Williams at 125 m.p.h.Bob on May 13, 2020:Margaret Court is the greatest female tennis player of all time. She won 24 Grand Slam singles titles, 19 Grand Slam womens’ doubles titles and 21 Grand Slam mixed doubles titles, for a total of 64 Grand Slam titles! Congratulations Margaret!Lincoln on May 13, 2020:O yeah just read few comments here. N glad to know people still talk sense. I also have same opinion that Monica Seles was a rage before that sad sad incident which not only harmed her but to the Tennis game also as it deprived this game of a well celebrated chapter in its legacy..... But on other hand I also feel sad for Martina Hingis as she was also a true beauty in game but lasted very short owing to less power and non serious attitude towards fitness..... I hope all sane tennis lovers wd agree to it.Wild Bill on May 13, 2020:I believe facing Monica was like having to step in the batters box against Nolan Ryan or putting with Tiger Woods 10 feet away from you. Almost like stepping up against Tyson. Take away the tragedy, and IFF she could stay healthy for many years, she could have slaughtered the record book. But, because that's a big "if", and Martina did slaughter it, for many years, so Martina must be my choice. Very, very, very few players could step on the court with either one of these two, and say, "I might have a shot." Against Steffi? Yeah. Against Chris? I think possibly. So there. Oh -- wait --Oh -- oops -- I forgot about Serena. Never mind everything I said. What was I thinking?Peter on May 13, 2020:Although Monica Seles may have ended up with the most Grand Slam singles titles had she not been stabbed, Margaret Court is definitely the best female tennis player of all time, because not only did she win 24 Grand Slam singles titles, she won many other Grand Slam titles in doubles and mixed doubles, which is why Serena Williams and Martina Navratilova should also be ranked highly, because Serena and Martina were great singles and doubles players too, whereas Chris Evert and Steffi Graf hardly played doubles. I don’t think Steffi Graf had a good backhand either because she sliced it rather than hit over the ball. Someone like Ash Barty of today, has a better sliced backhand than Steffi Graf.Kevin on May 13, 2020:The reason why Monica Seles is also the best player of all time was that she was regularly beating Steffi Graf, one of the other best players of all time, before she was stabbed.Tom on May 12, 2020:I would have to say Monica Seles. She would have ended up with the most Grand Slam singles titles, had she not been stabbed. Maureen Connolly would be my next choice, had she not had a horse riding accident.Charlie Mckinz on May 08, 2020:Well Serena Had the power.... But Steffi and Hingis had court sense like none other.... My God still remember how Hingis being not fit so well used to rally those balls everywhere... KudosDyna on May 07, 2020:Steffi Graf Is The Greatest Of All Time! 1988 GOLDEN SLAM!Babur on April 24, 2020:Hands down Martina Hingis. Real playerSycone' on April 20, 2020:Martina Navratilova is GOAT.... Class apart..... Then come Graff, Evert, Serena and Hingis on the listRelated ArticlesA lot of great tennis players have come and gone over the years.  Ever wonder who is considered the greatest of all time?  Here is my list of the top ten greatest men's tennis players of the Open Era.Women’s professional tennis has faced decades of sexism. Those who’ve battled on the court have also spent years battling against general disregard, social commentary, and double standards.Novak Djokovic is on top of the tennis world.  Fresh off of his eighth  Australian Open Tennis title, Djokovic is currently the top ranked player in the world.Rafael Nadal's record-setting seventh French Open title broke Bjorn Borg's record and gives Rafael 11 Grand Slam titles.History and trivia on Australia's biggest tennis tournament.Consider this article a bit of a “cheat sheet” to the US Open. Here, you’ll find just enough information to sound like an Arthur Ashe aficionado the next time you get talking tennis.Plan ahead to get fairly priced tickets for next summer's Wimbledon championships. Here’s how to avoid the ticket touts and see live tennis.This article tell you all you need to know about Wimbledon. You don't have to be an avid tennis fan to sound like you know what you're talking about.Who are the 10 best basketball players of all time? Is Michael Jordan still number one? Do the basketball superstars of today make it on the list? We'll also looks at some honorable mentions and best players by position.Ever found yourself wondering how the men's tennis ranking works? Then this article is for you.There are four primary styles of singles play in tennis: aggressive baseliner, serve-and-volleyer, counterpuncher, and all-court player. For each style, I describe the key strategies you can employ to beat them.The "Big Four" have dominated the rest of the field in tennis, but the dynamic within that group is constantly changing.My top three selections for the best tennis racquets currently available and priced at under $100.This article examines the ups and downs of Roger Federer's career over time.My experiences of camping overnight in the park in the Wimbledon queue to obtain centre court tickets for the tennis championship. Yes, it takes that kind of dedication for a normal person to get Wimbledon tickets.