
~ Experienced midfielder Manpreet Singh to lead the team along with Harmanpreet Singh as Vice-Captain ~  
New Delhi, 22 February 2022: Hockey India today named the 20-member Indian Men's Hockey Team who will represent the country in the upcoming FIH Men's Hockey Pro League matches at home in Bhubaneswar, Odisha against Spain. The matches will be held over the weekend on 26th and 27th February 2022. 
The team will be led by experienced midfielder Manpreet Singh and Vice Captained by dragflick specialist Harmanpreet Singh. The Indian team will see a new face in promising young forward in Sukhjeet Singh from Punjab who was picked in the Core Group following an impressive stint with the Punjab National Bank during the maiden Hockey India Senior Men Inter-Department National Championship 2021 held in Bengaluru. 
The 20-member squad for the double-header against Spain includes goalkeepers PR Sreejesh and Suraj Karkera. Defenders Harmanpreet Singh, Mandeep Mor, Surender Kumar, Varun Kumar, Jarmanpreet Singh and Dipsan Tirkey. The team features an experienced midfield with Manpreet Singh, Vivek Sagar Prasad, Hardik Singh, Jaskaran Singh, Shamsher Singh, Nilakanta Sharma and Akashdeep Singh while the forwardline features Mandeep Singh, Lalit Kumar Upadhyay, Shilanand Lakra, new comer Sukhjeet Singh and Abhishek who did well against South Africa and France earlier this month has also received a call-up to the team.  
Additionally, Krishan Bahadur Pathak, Amit Rohidas, Rajkumar Pal, Moirangthem Rabichandra Singh and Dilpreet Singh have been named as standbys. 
Talking about the team selection, Graham Reid, the Chief Coach of Indian Men's Hockey Team said, "We have chosen a balanced group to play Spain for this weekend and are looking forward to playing at home in Bhubaneswar. It includes another new debutant striker Sukhjeet Singh who impressed during the selection camp last month and has been working hard since selection in the Core Probable's Group."
"Spain has a new coach and will be keen to impress after losing to England. These games are an important step in preparation for what is a very busy year," Reid added. 
 
Indian Men's Team: 
Goalkeepers

PR Sreejesh 
Suraj Karkera  

 
Defenders

Harmanpreet Singh (Vice Captain) 
Mandeep Mor 
Surender Kumar 
Varun Kumar 
Jarmanpreet Singh
Dipsan Tirkey  

 
Midfielders

Manpreet Singh (Captain)
Vivek Sagar Prasad 
Hardik Singh 
Jaskaran Singh 
Shamsher Singh 
Nilakanta Sharma 
Akashdeep Singh

 
Forwards 

Mandeep Singh 
Lalit Kumar Upadhyay 
Shilanand Lakra 
Sukhjeet Singh 
Abhishek 

 
Standbys 

Krishan Bahadur Pathak 
Amit Rohidas 
Rajkumar Pal 
Moirangthem Rabichandra Singh 
Dilpreet Singh 

~ Experienced midfielder Manpreet Singh to lead the team along with Harmanpreet Singh as Vice-Captain ~  New Delhi, 22 February 2022: Hockey India today named the 20-member Indian Men's Hockey Team who will represent the country in the upcoming FIH Men's Hockey Pro League matches at home in Bhubaneswar, Odisha against Spain. The matches will be held over the weekend on 26th and 27th February 2022. The team will be led by experienced midfielder Manpreet Singh and Vice Captained by dragflick specialist Harmanpreet Singh. The Indian team will see a new face in promising young forward in Sukhjeet Singh from Punjab who was picked in the Core Group following an impressive stint with the Punjab National Bank during the maiden Hockey India Senior Men Inter-Department National Championship 2021 held in Bengaluru. The 20-member squad for the double-header against Spain includes goalkeepers PR Sreejesh and Suraj Karkera. Defenders Harmanpreet Singh, Mandeep Mor, Surender Kumar, Varun Kumar, Jarmanpreet Singh and Dipsan Tirkey. The team features an experienced midfield with Manpreet Singh, Vivek Sagar Prasad, Hardik Singh, Jaskaran Singh, Shamsher Singh, Nilakanta Sharma and Akashdeep Singh while the forwardline features Mandeep Singh, Lalit Kumar Upadhyay, Shilanand Lakra, new comer Sukhjeet Singh and Abhishek who did well against South Africa and France earlier this month has also received a call-up to the team.  Additionally, Krishan Bahadur Pathak, Amit Rohidas, Rajkumar Pal, Moirangthem Rabichandra Singh and Dilpreet Singh have been named as standbys. Talking about the team selection, Graham Reid, the Chief Coach of Indian Men's Hockey Team said, "We have chosen a balanced group to play Spain for this weekend and are looking forward to playing at home in Bhubaneswar. It includes another new debutant striker Sukhjeet Singh who impressed during the selection camp last month and has been working hard since selection in the Core Probable's Group.""Spain has a new coach and will be keen to impress after losing to England. These games are an important step in preparation for what is a very busy year," Reid added.  Indian Men's Team: Goalkeepers Defenders Midfielders Forwards  Standbys 
												Indian Women’s Hockey Team forward Vandana Katariya became a household name in the country following her exploits for Team India in the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. In her guest appearance on Hockey India podcast Hockey Te Charcha, Vandana shared insights on her journey from her prolific goal scoring in the 2013 Women’s Hockey Junior World Cup, to becoming a mainstay in the present Senior Indian Women’s Hockey Team with over 250 International Caps to her name.
											
												Hockey India will host the defending Champions and World no.1 Netherlands Women's Hockey Team for the double-header FIH Pro League matches on 8th and 9th April 2022 to be played at the Kalinga Hockey Stadium, Bhubaneswar in Odisha.
											We use cookies on this site to enhance your user experience . For a complete overview of all cookies used, please see our
                Cookie Policy
24th July 1952Balbir Singh Sr. - Most goals scored in an Olymic Finals game