
The Pakistan Hockey Federation ( Urdu: پاکستان ہاکی فیڈریشن) is the governing body for the sport of field hockey in Pakistan. It is affiliated with the International Hockey Federation (FIH).[1]
The current Patron-in-Chief is Prime Minister Imran Khan.[2] Federation's President is Khalid S. Khokhar, Secretary General is Asif Bajwa and treasurer is Muhammad Ikhlaq Usmani.
PHF Executive Board members are Khawar Anwar Khawaja, Mohamad Saeed Khan, Chaudhry Ismail Gujjar,  Syed Ghulam Mustafa Shah while Office Management Director Administration & Coordination is Javeed Arshad Khan Manj, Raja Ghazanfar Ali - office Secreatry, Muhammad Nadeem- Assistant Office Secretary, Saleem Gill - Accounts Manager and the IT & Digital Communication Manager is Muhammad Arslan Hasnat.[2]
The game of field hockey was originally brought to Pakistan during the British Raj, and like cricket, became a popular sport among the local population. The Pakistan Hockey Federation came into being in 1948,[1] following the independence of Pakistan in 1947.  Prior to this, players from what is now Pakistan had competed internationally alongside players from what is now India. In the beginning, the Federation's membership included the provincial hockey federations of Punjab, Sindh, Balochistan, Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa, Bahawalpur, East Bengal and the Pakistani Armed Forces Sports Board.
Pakistan played their first international game in London when they defeated Belgium 2-1 at the 14th Olympic Games on 2 August 1948.[1] The first President of PHF was Ghazanfar Ali Khan, with Baseer Ali Sheikh as the Honorary Secretary.[2] The Pakistan national side soon established a strong reputation in international competition, helping to maintain interest in the game in Pakistan which assisted the growth of the Federation. However, no full-time central office or secretariat, as such, was established until the 1960s. The office of the Pakistan Hockey Federation, located at the National Hockey Stadium was developed into a secretariat in 1971. It was during the second term as president of Air Marshal Nur Khan from 1978 that Pakistani hockey entered a golden age. National senior, national Junior and women hockey teams were all competing internationally. On the personal initiative of Air Marshal M. Nur Khan, the FIH introduced the World Cup and the Champions Trophy, which are now rated among field hockey's major international tournaments alongside the Olympics.[1]
However, the 1976 Olympics in Montreal had seen the introduction of artificial turf to international hockey competition. Pakistan was unable to build many artificial turf pitches compared to the European sides, and thus the strength of the national side began declining slowly.[1][3]
The following is a list of the Presidents of PHF:[4]
Former members: Soviet Union
