Main ContentTop of the pageDuring the first 6 to 10 weeks of your pregnancy, your body goes through many changes. Your baby grows very quickly, even though you can't feel it yet. You may start to feel different, both in your body and your emotions. Because each pregnancy is unique, there's no right way to feel. You may feel the healthiest you've ever been, or you might feel tired or sick to your stomach ("morning sickness").These early weeks are a time to make healthy choices and to eat the best foods for you and your baby. This is also a good time to think about birth defects testing. These are tests done during pregnancy to look for possible problems with the baby. First-trimester tests for birth defects can be done between 10 and 13 weeks of pregnancy, depending on the test. Talk with your doctor about what kinds of tests are available.Follow-up care is a key part of your treatment and safety. Be sure to make and go to all appointments, and call your doctor or nurse call line if you are having problems. It's also a good idea to know your test results and keep a list of the medicines you take.Go to Canada's Food Guide at https://food-guide.canada.ca/en/ to make sure you are eating a variety of foods each day. In your second and third trimesters most women will need to eat more of these healthy foods for healthy weight gain. Talk to your doctor or midwife about what is right for you.Go to https://www.healthwise.net/patientEdEnter G112 in the search box to learn more about "Weeks 6 to 10 of Your Pregnancy: Care Instructions".Current as of: October 8, 2020Author: Healthwise StaffMedical Review:Adam Husney MD - Family Medicine & Kathleen Romito MD - Family MedicineCare instructions adapted under license by your healthcare professional. If you have questions about a medical condition or this instruction, always ask your healthcare professional. Healthwise, Incorporated disclaims any warranty or liability for your use of this information.Care instructions adapted under license by your healthcare professional. If you have questions about a medical condition or this instruction, always ask your healthcare professional. Healthwise, Incorporated disclaims any warranty or liability for your use of this information.©2006-2021 Healthwise, Incorporated. Healthwise, Healthwise for every health decision, and the Healthwise logo are trademarks of Healthwise, Incorporated.