Call us to schedule 813-878-2288620 S MacDill Ave, Tampa, FL 33609Call us to schedule 813-878-2288620 S MacDill Ave, Tampa, FL 3360913/04/2021 11:27What is the Definition of Health?    Health can be defined as a state of complete physical, mental, social and spiritual well being, which consists in maintaining the body as much as possible by following daily advice and preventive measures to reduce the possibility of diseases. Health has an important role in feeling happy, as there are many people who suffer from diseases, but the health enables them to fight diseases, as a result, they achieve physical fitness and feel comfortable or enjoy life like any normal person.     Your energy level is a reflection of your overall health and wellbeing. The more energy you have, the more you will get done in your day and life. We all have the same amount of time in the day, so the difference between us can only be the energy we bring into each aspect of our life. What most people don’t realize is that there is a symbiotic relationship between your health and the other parts to your life. Your health is made up of four layers:1.Physical2.Mental3. Emotional4.Spiritual    Most people assume great health is achieved by the obvious; eating healthy foods and working out. Most people miss that chiropractic care is essential for life-long health. Chiropractic care can bring someone from not-so-great health into good health and from good health into great health! When your nervous system is functioning at its best, your body will feel its best and work how it’s supposed to! Think about it like this you’re reading this article, you’re breathing and your heart is beating all automatically, you don’t have to think about doing these functions on a daily basis, your body just does it for you through your nervous system. Chiropractic helps keep the spine, the protective case for your nervous system, in proper alignment. Without proper structure you will never have proper function.       If you’re ready to try chiropractic and take control of your health and step it up to that next level. Call Dr. Jason Cherry, in Tampa, Florida, owner of Cherry Family Chiropractic for your complimentary consultation. He is a Webster certified – Pierce Results System Chiropractor who is ready and willing to help you with all your health cares and concerns. Please give us a call at 813-878-2288.