"Vitamin M" — is melatonin the cure for your sleep problems?The care that transgender youth need and deserveAnti-inflammatory food superstars for every seasonWarming up to the cold: Staying active in any weatherStruggling to sleep? Your heart may pay the priceThe mental health crisis among children and teens: How parents can helpHarvard Health Ad Watch: A blood thinner winner?Talking to children about tragedies and scary headlines in the newsClose relationships with neighbors influence cardiovascular health in Black adultsCan breastfeeding really prevent pregnancy?Harvard Health BlogARCHIVED CONTENT: As a service to our readers, Harvard Health Publishing provides access to our library of archived content. Please note the date each article was posted or last reviewed. No content on this site, regardless of date, should ever be used as a substitute for direct medical advice from your doctor or other qualified clinician. I once took care of an elderly patient who wasn’t particularly interested in some of the preventive measures I was recommending. He liked to say “you gotta die of something.” True enough. But that’s no reason to ignore measures that could prevent deaths, especially the “low-hanging fruit” such as automobile accidents.When thinking about the most serious health problems, there are several ways of looking at them. For example, you might considerThese three lists are not the same. Let’s consider each.According to CDC, the top 10 causes of death and the approximate number of deaths each year in the U.S. areThese numbers come from death certificates, and that means they are subject to some error. For example, when a person in his 90s has several chronic diseases and “dies in his sleep,” the cause of death listed on the death certificate might be little more than a hunch.Contrast the list above to the health concerns that rise to the top when large numbers of people are surveyed. For example, a Gallup poll conducted yearly asks adults in the U.S. to name the most urgent health concerns. In the November 2015 poll, cost and access to healthcare were at the top (as they have been for many years). As for diseases, here are the most frequently mentioned concerns:Remarkably, many of the top causes of death don’t even show up on this list, and many that do barely register. Perhaps survey respondents are thinking more about conditions that cause suffering or impaired quality of life rather than causing death. Or, perhaps the causes of death that primarily affect the elderly (such as stroke) are not as big a concern to the public as those that affect younger individuals. Whatever the reason, the difference is striking.A recent study analyzed the causes of death in each state, and for each identified those that were significantly higher than the average elsewhere. For example, researchers found:Sometimes the reasons for these findings are obvious. For example, it’s understandable (though regrettable) that agricultural states such as Iowa and North Dakota might have a higher than average rate of death due to machinery, or that bicycle deaths might be most common in a place like Florida where the weather allows year-round biking. Others, such as the rates of suicide, are harder to understand.A separate study recently assessed the least healthy cities in the U.S. Of the top 10 unhealthiest cities (or should we say bottom 10), all were in the southern states and most were rural. Contributors to poor health in these cities were lack of insurance, lack of access to healthcare, unhealthy diets, and relatively high rates of deaths due to injury and drug overdose.It’s not surprising that the top causes of death might vary from place to place. But, that means that the measures we should take to improve our health may not be the same everywhere. It’s particularly important to recognize those diseases that we know can be prevented, slowed, or even reversed with preventive care, changes in diet, exercise, or medications. Good examples include many cases of diabetes and heart disease.While avoiding preventable death is an important measure of health, it’s not the only one. Maintaining a high quality of life matters as well — and some would say that quality of life is more important than how long it is. Still, information about causes of death is of interest not only because of what it may say about how we live, but also in directing interventions.
    As a service to our readers, Harvard Health Publishing provides access to our library of archived content.
    Please note the date of last review or update on all articles. No content on this site, regardless of date,
    should ever be used as a substitute for direct medical advice from your doctor or other qualified clinician.
Commenting has been closed for this post.Women's HealthDiseases & ConditionsDiseases & ConditionsGet the latest in health news delivered to your inbox!
                    © 2022 by The President and Fellows of Harvard College
                Do not sell my personal information | Privacy PolicyThanks for visiting. Don't miss your FREE gift.The Best Diets for Cognitive Fitness, is yours absolutely FREE when you sign up to receive Health Alerts from Harvard Medical SchoolSign up to get tips for living a healthy lifestyle, with ways to  fight inflammation and improve cognitive health, plus the latest advances in preventative medicine, diet and exercise, pain relief, blood pressure and cholesterol management, and more.Health Alerts from Harvard Medical SchoolGet helpful tips and guidance for everything from fighting inflammation to finding the best diets for weight loss...from exercises to build a stronger core to advice on treating cataracts. PLUS, the latest news on medical advances and breakthroughs from Harvard Medical School experts.BONUS! Sign up now and get a FREE copy of theBest Diets for Cognitive FitnessStay on top of latest health news from Harvard Medical School.Plus, get a FREE copy of the Best Diets for Cognitive Fitness.