A new year is here and many of us have goals for maintaining good health. So just what are the most important factors for establishing optimum health. Studies indicate that the following five factors make the biggest difference in overall health and wellness: 1) diet; 2) rest; 3) exercise; 4) posture; and 5) avoiding the use of alcohol, drugs and tobacco. When self-evaluating where you are with these five factors, choose your weakest area and start with making goals for improvement. Learn how partnering with Balanced Well-Being Healthcare can help you improve your overall wellness. “A history of poor eating and physical activity patterns have a cumulative effect and have contributed to significant nutrition- and physical activity-related health challenges that now face the U.S. population. About half of all American adults—117 million individuals—have one or more preventable chronic diseases, many of which are related to poor quality eating patterns and physical inactivity. These include cardiovascular disease, high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes, some cancers, and poor bone health,” reports the Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion.Nutrition is paramount in the Balanced Well-Being functional approach to maintaining good health. Our nutritionist is involved in all new patient packages to help align diet with individualized treatment plans. In addition to her collaboration in the Functional Medicine Package, our nutritionist offers individually designed treatment plans for diet, nutritional supplements and lifestyle changes based on testing results.In today’s day and age, rest often takes the backseat to other priorities when we are short on time, but those z’s you are sacrificing now, may cause you long-term problems in the future. “Insufficient sleep has also been linked to these (obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular disease) and other health problems, and is considered an important risk factor. Although scientists have just begun to identify the connections between insufficient sleep and disease, most experts have concluded that getting enough high-quality sleep may be as important to health and well-being as nutrition and exercise,” says Harvard Health.Some individuals attempt to obtain sufficient sleep but are prevented by an actual sleep disorder. The there are two main types of sleep disorders: obstructive sleep apnea and central sleep apnea.The most common type of sleep disorder is the obstructive variety. In obstructive sleep apnea the upper airway leading to the lungs becomes obstructed at various potential spots. This obstruction may be caused by excess tissue in the airway as in obesity, enlarged tonsils, a very large tongue, nasal obstruction, and relaxation of the airway musculature collapsing when asleep.If you are suspicious that you may have a sleep disorder, consult with the experts in our office to help ascertain if you do and receive recommended treatment. The Mayo Clinic offers these seven reasons why exercise is vital for maintaining good health:Before beginning an exercise regimen, it always important to consult your doctor to make sure you are ready for certain levels/types of exercise. How much exercise is recommended? The Department of Health and Human Services recommends at least 150 minutes a week of moderate aerobic activity or 75 minutes a week of vigorous aerobic activity a week, or a combination of the two. Don’t forget to incorporate strength training for all the major muscle groups at least twice a week using free weights, weight machines or body-weight exercises.Space out your activities throughout the week. When thinking about ways for maintaining good health, posture probably isn’t one that people think of very often. However, we should! “Having poor posture can put more stress on certain muscles and joints, forcing them to be overworked and causing them to fatigue,” says the U.S. News and World Report. Their research shows that poor posture can cause problems with fatigue, circulation, arthritis, mood, musculoskeletal dysfunction, jaw pain, breathing efficacy, headaches, sexual function, and shoulder and back pain.  When it comes to alcohol use, what is considered ok? According to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans reported by the reports the Centers of Disease Control and Development, moderate drinking is defined as up to 1 drink per day for women and up to 2 drinks per day for men.The Dietary Guidelines recommend that the following individuals should NOT drink for any reason:The CDC also strongly advises against smoking and tobacco use. “Smoking leads to disease and disability and harms nearly every organ of the body. More than 16 million Americans are living with a disease caused by smoking.”Serious smoking-related illness includes:  cancer, heart disease, stroke, lung diseases, diabetes, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), which includes emphysema and chronic bronchitis. Smoking also increases risk for tuberculosis, certain eye diseases, and problems of the immune system, including rheumatoid arthritis.“Secondhand smoke exposure contributes to approximately 41,000 deaths among nonsmoking adults and 400 deaths in infants each year. Secondhand smoke causes stroke, lung cancer, and coronary heart disease in adults. Children who are exposed to secondhand smoke are at increased risk for sudden infant death syndrome, acute respiratory infections, middle ear disease, more severe asthma, respiratory symptoms, and slowed lung growth.”Learning how to incorporate these tips for maintaining good health is made easier by recruiting a Balanced Well-Being Healthcare coach. It can mean the difference to you between so-called “yo-yo diets” and the long-term health, energetic lifestyle, and emotional and physical wellness you deserve. We can provide you the tools to be truly “free” for your entire lifetime!Call us today at 970-631-8286 to learn more!
					© 2021 Balanced Well-Being Healthcare. All Rights Reserved
				