You have no saved courses.It's simple, just look for the 'save this course' buttons when viewing course search results, listings or details.Saving courses allow you to compare them, it also allows you to create a permanent list of 'favourites' that will always be there when you visit our site.Studying Public Health at BCU equips you with the knowledge, understanding and skills required to carry out important public health work. But why is Public Health so import? Student, Naima shares her top 10 reasons why it's important and so rewarding to be part of. 1. Public Health studies plays a major role in fighting off the biggest killers of humans. Public Health professionals, who have either studied a Public Health degree or Health Studies related course, are constantly battling against diabetes, cancer, heart disease and dementia to maintain the health and well-being of the population.2. A fundamental quality of Public Health is its preventative nature. Prevention is far more effective and far less expensive than cure.3. Public Health is important due to aiding and prolonging life. Through the prevention of health issues, individuals can spend more of their years in good health.4. Public Health helps detect health issues as early as possible and responds appropriately to avoid the development of disease.5. It is diverse and takes into account the health of the whole population, rather than focusing on health at an individual level.6. Public Health is important as it ensures everyone is aware of health hazards through educational programmes, campaigns and through influencing government policies.7. It is important because you are constantly building new skills and expanding as a person. This is due to the nature of the work promoting growth through day to day activities and taking part in major projects and campaigns.8. Public Health is important because you are constantly striving to close the inequality gap between people and encourage equal opportunities for children, all ethnicities and genders.9. Health is a human right and as a Public Health professional you are ensuring no one is disadvantaged regardless of their socio-economic background.10. Public Health is important because you become the voice for individuals who have no voice and simply put, your influence on the improvement of someone’s health can be a great satisfaction.Find out more about our MSc Public Health course - available to be studied full-time and part-time to suit you.Go to the course pageWhy not find out more about our MSc Public Health course and discover all that we have to offer.Discover moreRecent searches
                    We won't record your recent searches as you have opted out of functional cookies.
                    You can change this on our Manage Privacy page should you wish to.
                Popular searchesSuggested searches