"Vitamin M" — is melatonin the cure for your sleep problems?The care that transgender youth need and deserveAnti-inflammatory food superstars for every seasonWarming up to the cold: Staying active in any weatherStruggling to sleep? Your heart may pay the priceThe mental health crisis among children and teens: How parents can helpHarvard Health Ad Watch: A blood thinner winner?Talking to children about tragedies and scary headlines in the newsClose relationships with neighbors influence cardiovascular health in Black adultsCan breastfeeding really prevent pregnancy?Nutrition  Eating a healthy diet is a cornerstone of treating and preventing heart disease. That’s easy to understand, but sometimes hard to implement. There’s no one-size-fits-all eating plan that will work for everyone. With that in mind, the American Heart Association updated its dietary guidelines for the first time in 15 years. Rather than listing dos and don’ts of specific nutrients (such as protein or fat), the new guidelines — published online Nov. 2, 2021, by Circulation — focus on healthy eating patterns. As long as you stay within the following rules, you can tailor a heart-healthy diet to your tastes and needs.1.Balance your calorie intake with physical activity. Weight gain is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease, and taking in more calories than you burn off leads to weight gain. Talk to a dietitian to find out how many calories you need to eat considering how active you are. It may only require a few tweaks to your diet to have the calories you eat balance the calories you burn during activity. "Maybe you need to reduce fast food and make room for nutritious foods. Or maybe your portions are too large. For instance, your salad might include a cup of beans when a quarter-cup is more appropriate," says Liz Moore, a registered dietitian at Harvard-affiliated Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.To continue reading this article, you must log in.Subscribe to Harvard Health Online for immediate access to health news and information from Harvard Medical School.I'd like to receive access to Harvard Health Online for only $4.99 a month.Already a member? Login ».
    As a service to our readers, Harvard Health Publishing provides access to our library of archived content.
    Please note the date of last review or update on all articles. No content on this site, regardless of date,
    should ever be used as a substitute for direct medical advice from your doctor or other qualified clinician.
NutritionNutritionNutritionYou might also be interested in…Eat real food. That’s the essence of today’s nutrition message. Our knowledge of nutrition has come full circle, back to eating food that is as close as possible to the way nature made it. Based on a solid foundation of current nutrition science, Harvard’s Special Health Report A Guide to Healthy Eating: Strategies, tips, and recipes to help you make better food choices​ describes how to eat for optimum health.Get the latest in health news delivered to your inbox!
                    © 2022 by The President and Fellows of Harvard College
                Do not sell my personal information | Privacy PolicyThanks for visiting. Don't miss your FREE gift.The Best Diets for Cognitive Fitness, is yours absolutely FREE when you sign up to receive Health Alerts from Harvard Medical SchoolSign up to get tips for living a healthy lifestyle, with ways to  fight inflammation and improve cognitive health, plus the latest advances in preventative medicine, diet and exercise, pain relief, blood pressure and cholesterol management, and more.Health Alerts from Harvard Medical SchoolGet helpful tips and guidance for everything from fighting inflammation to finding the best diets for weight loss...from exercises to build a stronger core to advice on treating cataracts. PLUS, the latest news on medical advances and breakthroughs from Harvard Medical School experts.BONUS! Sign up now and get a FREE copy of theBest Diets for Cognitive FitnessStay on top of latest health news from Harvard Medical School.Plus, get a FREE copy of the Best Diets for Cognitive Fitness.