Did you know that June is Men’s Health Month? The purpose of the month is to heighten the awareness of preventable health problems and encourage early detection and treatment of disease among men and boys. From challenging and debating key issues in men’s health to raising the profile of men, their health outcomes and health needs, it’s all about starting a conversation. Read on to find out more about men’s health and how St John Medical is here to help. Fact: A boy born in Australia has a life expectancy of 78.0 years while a girl born at the same time could expect to live to 82.3 years old. Right from the start, boys are expected to suffer more illness, more accidents and die earlier than their female counterparts. Meanwhile, men are less frequent visitors to general practitioners fuelling the perception that they don’t care about their health. So in order to help men live healthier and happier lives, all parties needs to be prepared with awareness being key.Some of the main types of disease that affect men’s health include:Improving men’s health outcomes is a two-way process involving men, women, families and health services combined. It’s important that men make use of health services to preventatively manage their health and find out before it’s too late if problems do exist. But equally, health services need to know how to reach out to, communicate with and engage with men to be effective in helping them when they do come for help.We need to create environments that support the ability of men to access healthcare efficiently and health services to treat them effectively. At St John Medical, all our medical centres offer general practice and our resources ensure that you receive fast and professional care from the moment you walk through our doors. Our team of friendly doctors offer timely, professional care from four convenient locations around Perth. They are:Contact us now for further information or to make an appointment. Alternatively, book an appointment online or simply walk-in for urgent care.
                    Here at St John Medical, we cannot stress the importance of women’s health enough. Good health should be a priority, however this can be difficult for many women who lead busy lives and don’t take the time needed to stay on top of their health and wellbeing. Read on to find why you should put your own health first and how St John Medical can help.
Why women’s health?
According to the Austr...                    
                    Did you know 1 in 5 males are at risk of developing prostate cancer by age 85, making it the most common internal cancer in Australian men? In fact, more men die of prostate cancer each year than women do of breast cancer, with an estimated 3,500 deaths in 2018.

This is a sobering statistic and is only set to rise, increasing from 2,711 deaths in 2001 to 3,102 in 2014 and expected to reach 25,0...                    Please select a location belowPlease select a location belowPlease select a location belowDue to unforeseen circumstances, Midland Urgent Care will not be accepting patients today from 2pm (Saturday 20 November 2021).For all emergencies, please call Triple Zero (000) or visit your local emergency department.Dental and GP appointments will not be affected and remain as scheduled. 