

Back to 
            Guides, tools and activities
          
Evidence suggests there are 5 steps you can take to improve your mental health and wellbeing. Trying these things could help you feel more positive and able to get the most out of life.Get advice about coronavirus and looking after your mental wellbeing:Good relationships are important for your mental wellbeing. They can:There are lots of things you could try to help build stronger and closer relationships:if possible, take time each day to be with your family, for example, try arranging a fixed time to eat dinner togetherarrange a day out with friends you have not seen for a whiletry switching off the TV to talk or play a game with your children, friends or familyhave lunch with a colleaguevisit a friend or family member who needs support or companyvolunteer at a local school, hospital or community group. Find out how to volunteer on the GOV.UK websitemake the most of technology to stay in touch with friends and family. Video-chat apps like Skype and FaceTime are useful, especially if you live far apartdo not rely on technology or social media alone to build relationships. It's easy to get into the habit of only ever texting, messaging or emailing peopleBeing active is not only great for your physical health and fitness. Evidence also shows it can also improve your mental wellbeing by:Find out more about getting activefind free activities to help you get fitif you have a disability or long-term health condition, find out about getting active with a disabilitystart running with our couch to 5k podcastsfind out how to start swimming, cycling or dancingfind out about getting started with exercisedo not feel that you have to spend hours in a gym. It's best to find activities you enjoy and make them a part of your lifeResearch shows that learning new skills can also improve your mental wellbeing by:Even if you feel like you do not have enough time, or you may not need to learn new things, there are lots of different ways to bring learning into your life.Some of the things you could try include:try learning to cook something new. Find out about healthy eating and cooking tipstry taking on a new responsibility at work, such as mentoring a junior staff member or improving your presentation skillswork on a DIY project, such as fixing a broken bike, garden gate or something bigger. There are lots of free video tutorials onlineconsider signing up for a course at a local college. You could try learning a new language or a practical skill such as plumbingtry new hobbies that challenge you, such as writing a blog, taking up a new sport or learning to paintdo not feel you have to learn new qualifications or sit exams if this does not interest you. It's best to find activities you enjoy and make them a part of your lifeResearch suggests that acts of giving and kindness can help improve your mental wellbeing by:It could be small acts of kindness towards other people, or larger ones like volunteering in your local community.Some examples of the things you could try include:Paying more attention to the present moment can improve your mental wellbeing. This includes your thoughts and feelings, your body and the world around you.Some people call this awareness "mindfulness". Mindfulness can help you enjoy life more and understand yourself better. It can positively change the way you feel about life and how you approach challenges.Read more about mindfulness, including steps you can take to be more mindful in your everyday life.The mental health charity Mind also offer information about the 5 ways to wellbeing.
      Page last reviewed: 6 November 2019
      
      Next review due: 6 November 2022
    © Crown copyright