 ALERT: Your health is top priority. We’re committed to providing reliable COVID-19 resources to keep you informed and safe.Men’s health involves a variety of gender-specific issues, like testosterone production, sexual health and increased likelihood of engaging in risky behavior. Many men avoid doctors and hospitals but suffer from preventable diseases and conditions. Unfortunately, there are also a number of supplements targeted toward men that may do more harm than good. Men can take control of their health by eating a healthy diet, making simple lifestyle adjustments and visiting the doctor regularly.Board-certified physicians medically review Drugwatch content to ensure its accuracy and quality.Drugwatch partners with Physicians’ Review Network Inc. to enlist specialists. PRN is a nationally recognized leader in providing independent medical reviews.Reviewer specialties include internal medicine, gastroenterology, oncology, orthopedic surgery and psychiatry.Many men do not make their health a high priority in their lives. The ailments that cause the most deaths and illnesses in men are either preventable or treatable. Unfortunately, men are usually less willing than women to visit doctors for checkups or preventative care, to seek treatment during the early stages of an ailment or to seek mental health advice. Men are also more likely to engage in risky behavior like drinking alcohol in excess, smoking tobacco and driving dangerously. Luckily, there are many easy steps that men can take to improve their health.From infancy to old age, men’s bodies go through diverse changes. It’s important for men to be aware of the changes taking place in their bodies. Older men may require different things than younger men in order to maintain their health.During adolescence, increasing testosterone levels often lead boys to develop an interest in sex and pursue more risky behaviors. Societal expectations may cause them to suppress emotions and develop a fear of communicating about changes in their lives. Some believe this may be why men are more likely than women to suffer unintentional harm or to die from homicide or suicide. Men are also more likely to die in an alcohol-related car accident.Through their 20s and 30s, when men are in their physical prime, they mature and begin to stop engaging in risky behaviors. Still, men are more likely than women to abuse alcohol, smoke and die of accidental deaths.During their 40s and 50s, men’s bodies produce testosterone at declining rates. They begin to lose muscle mass and become more prone to weight gain. Their risk for heart disease, high blood pressure, and diabetes increases. On average, men develop heart disease about 10 years earlier than women, and 1 in 4 male deaths is caused by heart disease.Men’s bodies never completely stop producing testosterone, but testosterone production may decrease with age. When men reach their 60s and 70s, they may begin to experience hair loss and enlarging prostates. In older age, men often become less active and need fewer calories. However, their bodies can’t absorb nutrients at the same rate so they must pay close attention to what they eat.Historically, men avoid seeking healthcare until they have to. About 38 percent of men admit to only going to the doctor when they are extremely sick or when symptoms don’t go away on their own. In a survey from the American Academy of Family Physicians, 55 percent of men admitted that they had not seen a doctor for a physical exam within the previous year, although 40 percent of them had one or more chronic health conditions.Unfortunately, doctors could prevent and treat many of the common health conditions in men with early diagnoses. If caught early, doctors can more effectively treat major conditions like heart disease and colon cancer.Interestingly, men who are married are more likely to visit the doctor and seek preventative services than cohabitating men or other non-married men. Visiting the doctor regularly can help men catch potentially deadly diseases or conditions early.Men suffer from many of the same conditions that women suffer from, but the conditions affect the sexes differently.Men are at a higher risk for high blood pressure than women until age 64. At ages 65 and older, women are more likely to get high blood pressure. High blood pressure can lead to a number of problems, including heart failure, aneurysms (bulges in arteries), and an increased risk of heart attack, stroke and kidney failure.Many men with high blood pressure are also at risk for diabetes, which is a major health concern. The excess buildup of sugar in the body caused by diabetes can lead to severe health problems, including stroke, congestive heart failure, peripheral artery disease, kidney disease and nerve damage. An estimated 14 percent of men older than 18 have diabetes in the U.S.Heart disease causes about 25 percent of all male deaths in the U.S. every year. The lack of symptoms before sudden death from heart disease is one of the scariest aspects of the illness. About one half of all men who die suddenly from heart disease never experience symptoms.The risk factors for heart disease include high blood pressure, high cholesterol and smoking. An estimated 51 percent of American men possess at least one of those risk factors.Several other factors can contribute to the disease, including diabetes, obesity, poor diet, physical inactivity and excessive alcohol intake.Cancer kills more than 300,000 American men every year. The most common types of cancer that affect men include skin, prostate, lung and colorectal cancer.Lung cancer causes more male deaths than any other cancer, and prostate cancer is the most common cancer that affects men. Cigarette smoking is almost always the cause of lung cancer, so avoiding or quitting smoking can help prevent this type of cancer.Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men, but it grows so slowly that many men do not die from it. In fact, many men die from other causes and never know they had prostate cancer. Treating and screening for cancer may not be helpful for all men, so men should talk to their doctors to discuss their options.Testicular cancer is another major issue among men. Rates of testicular cancer are highest among men ages 30 to 39. Another concern is human papillomaviruses (HPV), which can sometimes cause cancer in men. The CDC recommends HPV vaccines for boys ages 11-12, and for men younger than 27 who have not already been vaccinated.Testicular cancer is another major issue among men. It most commonly occurs in men ages 20-54. Another concern is human papillomaviruses (HPB), which can cause cancer. Doctors recommend HPV vaccines for boys ages 11-21, and for men younger than 27 who have sex with men.Although everyone can experience depression, men and women experience it differently. Men are usually more likely to feel tired and irritable and lose interest in work, family and hobbies. Men suffering from depression are usually more likely to find sleeping difficult.Although women attempt to commit suicide at a higher rate, men are almost four times more likely to die from suicide than women. Men account for 78 percent of all American suicide deaths.Many men fail to recognize and seek help for depression, often because they are less likely to talk about their feelings. Depression affects men of all ages and races. A variety of factors contribute to the disorder, including genes, environmental stress and illness. However, men who seek help or treatment can recover.Osteoporosis is more likely to affect women than men, but that does not mean men are immune to it. Osteoporosis causes a weakening of the skeleton which makes it easier for bones to break. Millions of men in the U.S. suffer from the disease.Osteoporosis carries a stereotype as a “woman’s disease” because men have larger skeletal frames that begin to suffer bone loss later in life. But as humans begin to live longer, the disease is a serious threat to older men. It is of most concern to men older than 65, the age at which most men begin to lose bone mass and fail to absorb calcium at the same rate.The most common fractures in osteoporosis occur in the hip, spine and wrist. The fractures can cause disabilities, and complications from hip fractures are more likely to kill men than women.The importance of sexual health to men is evident by the billions of dollars men spend on sexual enhancement drugs and supplements each year. Sexual health refers to a state of wellbeing in which a man can completely participate and enjoy sexual activity.Hormones like testosterone drive sexual desire in men, but many men view sex as more than a reproductive function. For most men, sex is also a pleasurable activity and a way to strengthen bonds between two people.A wide variety of factors affect men’s sexual health, including physical, psychological, social and interpersonal factors. Sex is not without its downsides though.Sexually-transmitted diseases, or STDs, can ruin men’s overall health and sexual health. While abstinence is the best way to avoid STDs, it’s not an option many men are willing to consider. Men can reduce the risk of obtaining an STD by knowing the sexual history of their partner, using latex condoms and receiving vaccinations.The top prescription drugs for male sexual enhancement – Cialis, Viagra and Levitra – generated more than $4.3 billion in revenue in 2012. Unproven herbal supplements, like Enzyte and Extenze, generated hundreds of millions of dollars in annual revenue during the peaks of their successes.However, rare but potentially dangerous side effects have been associated with these drug. Viagra has been linked to sudden drops in blood pressure, vision loss and hearing loss. All three prescription male enhancement drugs may cause headache, chest pain, dizziness and rash.Experts also accuse herbal supplements of being nothing more than scams preying on men’s perceived sexual inadequacies. Herbal supplements do not go through an approval process before being sold to consumers. Many sexual enhancement supplements sold online contain traces of the active ingredients of prescription drugs as well as other potentially dangerous chemicals.Erectile dysfunction, or ED, refers to the inability to produce or maintain an erection for satisfactory sexual activity.ED becomes more common as men age. One study found about 40 percent of men age 40 suffer from ED, and about 70 percent of men age 70 suffer from ED. Contributing factors include stress, depression, low testosterone and clogged arteries.ED may be due to another medical condition in up to 70 percent of men. ED may be a warning sign of heart disease or other serious issues.The ability for men to produce healthy sperm and reproduce is an important part of sexual health. However, many drugs and supplements can affect fertility in men. Most of the time, a disruption in the testosterone production process decreases fertility by blocking the testicles from receiving sperm production signals. This causes low sperm concentration or an absence of sperm in the semen.Men looking to have sex without causing pregnancy should use contraceptive methods. The most popular and proven contraceptive methods for men are condoms and vasectomies.Condoms have a failure rate of approximately 13 percent, meaning that about 13 out of 100 women will become pregnant each year if condoms are used as the couple’s only method of contraception.Condoms are disposable, and most are made of latex or polyurethane. Latex and polyurethane condoms reduce the risk of spreading STDs. Other condoms, like those made of lambskin, do not reduce STD risk.Vasectomies, also referred to as male sterilization, have a failure rate of less than 1 percent.Vasectomies require surgery. During the surgery, a doctor will cut, close, or block the path between the testes and the urethra, preventing sperm from leaving the testes. However, it usually isn’t fully effective until three months after the surgery. A vasectomy can be reversed in many cases, but it is not always reversible.The good news for men is that eating well, living a healthy lifestyle, and exercising regularly can prevent and treat almost all of their major health problems. Men can also talk to their doctors about taking nutritional supplements and receiving immunizations to help ensure long-lasting health.Even if men exercise, eat well and maintain a healthy lifestyle, they may still get sick. Men should always consult their doctors to make sure the benefits of any treatment outweigh the risks.There are several drugs that could pose a number of health risks to men.Men can live long, happy lives by paying attention to very basic aspects of their health. Although they may feel pressured by society or stereotypes to hide ailments or feelings, seeking regular healthcare can improve a man’s quality of life. By eating healthy, exercising moderately, living responsibly, and avoiding dangerous drugs and supplements, men can maintain long-lasting health.We appreciate your feedback. One of our content team members will be in touch with you soon.We appreciate your feedback. One of our content team members will be in touch with you soon.Board-certified physicians medically review Drugwatch content to ensure its accuracy and quality.Drugwatch partners with Physicians’ Review Network Inc. to enlist specialists. PRN is a nationally recognized leader in providing independent medical reviews.Reviewer specialties include internal medicine, gastroenterology, oncology, orthopedic surgery and psychiatry.Chris Elkins's expertise is in health communication. He worked with respected health communication scholar Athena du Pré on the textbook Communicating About Health: Current Issues and Perspectives: 5th Edition. He holds six certificates from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Some of his qualifications include:Drugwatch.com writers follow rigorous sourcing guidelines and cite only trustworthy sources of information, including peer-reviewed journals, court records, academic organizations, highly regarded nonprofit organizations, government reports and interviews with qualified experts. Review our editorial policy to learn more about our process for producing accurate, current and balanced content.Calling this number connects you with a Drugwatch representative. We will direct you to one of our trusted legal partners for a free case review.Drugwatch's trusted legal partners support the organization's mission to keep people safe from dangerous drugs and medical devices. For more information, visit our partners page.Join our newsletter to stay up to date on dangerous drugs and devices, keep up on lawsuit and settlement news, learn about FDA recalls, and more.Keep people safe from potentially harmful drugs, medical devices and procedures by informing them of medical conditions, severe side effects and ways to take action.This site complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health information: Verify here.
            Drugwatch is located at: 
1 South Orange Ave, Suite 201, Orlando, FL 32801
The information on this website is proprietary and protected. It is not a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. Any unauthorized or illegal use, copying or dissemination will be prosecuted. Please read our disclaimer for more information about our website.Drugwatch.com partners with law firms. This website and its content may be deemed attorney advertising. Prior results do not predict a similar outcome. For more information, visit our partners page.© 2022 Drugwatch.com Privacy Policy /


Do Not Sell My Info

 California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) Inquiries

 

Drugwatch.com doesn’t believe in selling customer information. However, as required by the new California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA), you may record your preference to view or remove your personal information by completing the form below.



Request Type

Please select a type:Information RequestData Deletion


Full Name



Full Name



Phone Number



Email



Street Address



Zip Code





Submit




Drugwatch.com doesn’t believe in selling customer information. However, as required by the new California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA), you may record your preference to view or remove your personal information by completing the form below.Your web browser is no longer supported by Microsoft. Update your browser for more security, speed and compatibility.If you would like to speak with a Drugwatch representative, please call 888-645-1617