   Siasat Blog - Pakistan's biggest digital media platform  Google revealed its 2020 search trends, and the results of the most-searched Pakistani actresses are surprising. Some of the names were predictable given their reputation in the entertainment industry and hit performances; however, some names have shocked the Pakistani audience.A post shared by Sana Javed (@sanajaved.official)A post shared by Sana Javed (@sanajaved.official)Searches per month: 89000Sana Javed entered the Pakistani entertainment industry quite a while ago but rose to fame with her very recent projects. These projects include names like Khaani and Ruswai.  Desi trolls attack Esra Bilgic over “indecent”…   Asim Azhar clarifies reports of calling Merub Ali his sister…   Islamophobic film The Kashmir Files called out for… A post shared by Hira Mani (@hiramaniofficial)A post shared by Hira Mani (@hiramaniofficial)Searches per month: 93,900Hira Mani, a mother of two kids and wife of actor Salman Sheikh aka Mani, had a slow start. However, the actress soon took up challenging roles and made a prominent name for herself in the Pakistani entertainment industry. She is currently ranked among the top Pakistani actresses.A post shared by Sajal Ahad Mir (@sajalaly)A post shared by Sajal Ahad Mir (@sajalaly)Searches per month: 114,000Sajal Aly has been in the field of acting for a solid eight years now. Alongside playing the lead role in Pakistani dramas and movies, the actress has starred in a Bollywood movie too. With the successes associated with her name, one would expect her to be much closer to the top of the search statistics; however, the numbers state otherwise.A post shared by AIMAN MUNEEB (@aimankhan.official)A post shared by AIMAN MUNEEB (@aimankhan.official)Searches per month: 121,000Aiman Khan married actor Muneeb Butt in 2018 and stopped taking TV projects after her wedding. While the actress has no recent dramas, she has a huge fan following on Instagram. Aiman likes to keep her fans entertained by posting adorable photos with her husband and daughter.A post shared by ???? ????? (@sabaqamarzaman)A post shared by ???? ????? (@sabaqamarzaman)Searches per month: 122,000Saba Qamar has a long list of hit dramas to her name, including a drama based on the life of the late social media sensation Qandeel Baloch. The actress also made her Bollywood debut alongside the late Irfan Khan and earned critical appraise for her lead role in the movie Hindi Medium.A post shared by Hania Aamir 哈尼亚·阿米尔 (@haniaheheofficial)A post shared by Hania Aamir 哈尼亚·阿米尔 (@haniaheheofficial)Searches per month: 128,000Hania Aamir made her debut with a film and then started acting in dramas too. To date, the actress has played the lead role in countless Pakistani dramas. Hania’s entertainment projects, personality, and nature tend to shine the media spotlight on her often.A post shared by Ayeza Khan (@ayezakhan.ak)A post shared by Ayeza Khan (@ayezakhan.ak)Searches per month: 148,000Ayeza Khan is married to actor Danish Taimoor and has two children with him. The actress took up some hit drama projects in 2020, like Meray Paas Tum Ho, which heightened her fame significantly.A post shared by Alizeh Shah (@alizehshahofficial)A post shared by Alizeh Shah (@alizehshahofficial)Searches per month: 180,000Alizeh Shah happens to be the newest sensation on Pakistan television. Although the actress has several dramas to her credit, she was noticed by Pakistanis for her role as Palwasha in Ishq Tamasha.A post shared by IQRA AZIZ HUSSAIN?? (@iiqraaziz)A post shared by IQRA AZIZ HUSSAIN?? (@iiqraaziz)Searches per month: 189,000Iqra Aziz has many powerful dramas to her name, including Qurbaan, Ranjha Ranjha Kardi, Suno Chanda, and more – her performance is appreciated in all. The actress Iqra Aziz made second place in this list, and rightfully so.A post shared by Mahira Khan (@mahirahkhan)A post shared by Mahira Khan (@mahirahkhan)Searches per month: 254,000Mahira Khan is a global star, and there is no denying that she deserves the top spot. The actress starred in the iconic drama serial Humsafar alongside Fawad Khan and made her Bollywood debut alongside Shahrukh Khan.What are your thoughts on this? Please share with us in the comment section below.who are they?why not to change the name of this website to ‘entertainment.pk’? I am literally tired of seeing such posts.why do u click? if u are not into it why just u cant ignore it?Mahira khan hahahahaha buddi maeee[…] young and glamorous Pakistani actress became part of the showbiz industry as a host. Later, she stepped into the entertainment world and […][…] 1.ثناء جاویدTop 10 Pakistani Actress […]Mahira Khan , Sarah Khan & Aleza Khan 3 Three Khan’s Best Beautiful Queen Of Acting Dance Singing AlsoGood postSiasat Staff | March 21, 2022 | 0Siasat Staff | March 21, 2022 | 0Arsalan Khattak | March 21, 2022 | 4Arsalan Khattak | March 21, 2022 | 0Siasat Staff | March 21, 2022 | 0Siasat Staff | March 19, 2022 | 1Siasat Staff | March 19, 2022 | 0Arsalan Khattak | March 19, 2022 | 0Arsalan Khattak | March 19, 2022 | 0Arsalan Khattak | March 19, 2022 | 0AsalamuAlikum,Everything that we've accomplished over the years is because of our members, who have allowed us to remain independent of corporate interests and reach Millions of followers.Why become a member?Besides supporting our independent media expansion, the Premium membership will provide even more value to our members.Here are some of the features:Session expiredPlease log in again. The login page will open in a new tab. After logging in you can close it and return to this page.Welcome, Login to your account.Recover your password.A password will be e-mailed to you.