The year 2021 was indeed great for TV and films in Pakistan. There are so many dramas that won the hearts of the audiences all over Pakistan in the past year. A lot of new faces have made appearance on screen in the past few months. Most of these debutants have done more than one project in a short timeline and received recognition. While this may all be valid, we have stepped into 2022 now. If you are an entertainment lover and like to binge watch quality dramas as well as films, this year will be full of excitement for you. We will be seeing many of our favourite actors in action again this year with entirely new TV and film projects. Excited to find out what’s next in the list of latest Pakistani dramas 2022? So are we! Let’s have a look.The much-awaited Main Manto Nahi Hoon is coming close to its launch. The news of this project has been around for quite a while now. Main Manto Nahi Hoon is a romantic story full of an emotional roller coaster ride. The cast of this project includes the fan-favourite Humayun Saeed, Maya Ali, and Mehwish Hayat. All of these stars will be surprising us with their whole new look and energies set for the project. Main Manto Nahi Hoon is a Six Sigma Plus Production. As of yet, there is no word about how soon we will be able to watch the drama on our TV screens. However, we can expect it to happen in the first quarter of 2022.This year is loaded with surprises for drama and film enthusiasts. If you have been desperately missing Fawad Khan on screen, it looks like your prayers might have just been heard. The heart-throb is set to return to the TV screen this year. Let’s not forget that we last saw Fawad Khan on screen in 2013. The drama Jo Bachay Hain Sang Samet Lo by Farhat Ishtiaq will mark the return of Fawad Khan to TV screen. Moreover, it is reported that we may see Ayesha Omer in the project as well. However, the character info and other details are yet to be revealed.The last year has been very fortunate for Hira Mani. She has appeared in several TV projects and remained the centre of attention in the showbiz industry. Her popularity has made it almost certain to expect her in the upcoming TV projects. This year, Hira Mani is set to appear alongside the talented Noor Hassan and none other than Muneeb Butt in Qismat. It is important to mention that the Qismat BTS pictures and insights can now be seen on social media. This also means that we are not very far from Qismat airing on our TV screens.Sang e Mah has started airing on HUM TV just a few weeks back. The drama is already winning the hearts of the public all over the country. This drama is special for several reasons. One of the key highlights of Sang e Mah is Atif Aslam’s TV debut. Not only that, he is also playing a lead role in the project. This drama also highlights the local culture and practices of the tribal areas in the north of Pakistan. For those who do not know, Sang e Mah is a Momina Duraid production. If we look at the cast of the drama, we can see Hania Amir, Kubra Khan, Atif Aslam, Nauman Ijaz, Omair Rana, Samiya Mumtaz, and Sania Saeed.This drama is a GEO TV production and will air soon in 2022 on the channel. A lot of eyes are set on the launch of Dekh Tamasha-e-Roshni owing to its unqiue and fan-favourite cast. We will be seeing our all-time favourite Ahsan Khan alongside Hiba Ali and Shahzad Sheikh. Additional cast members on the list include Farhan Ali Agha, Moomal Khalid, and Mujtaba Khalid in the key roles. As of yet, there is no insight about the storyline of the drama. While this may be true, we are desperately waiting for the plot details and the launch. Dekh Tamasha-e-Roshni is set to release in 2022.Another important drama project that we all await is Mere Humsafar. This drama is set to bring you the most wanted on screen pairing of Farhan Saeed and Hania Amir in the lead roles. Mere Humsafar will be the first project for the two talented stars to work together. As the name suggests, the drama will be a love story with a few interventions down the road. Both Farhan and Hania are recognized for their witty and sharp characters on screen. Let’s see if Mere Humsafar brings them forward in different character this time.On the list of new romantic dramas, Ye Ishq Samajh Na Aye definitely finds its spot. The drama is set to release this year with a talented cast onboard. You will be able to see a unique pairing on screen this time with Shahroz Sabzwari and Syeda Tuba Anwar. Although not many details about the project have been shared, Syeda Tuba Anwar mentioned in an interview with Dawn regarding her project wit Shahroz. She also mentioned that Shahroz is a great support. We will have to wait for further details of the project.Dil Awaiz is a GEO TV project set to air in 2022. The drama has been shot in a rural setting somewhere in Sindh. If we talk about the drama cast, we will be able to see Kinza Hashmi in the leading role alongside two male characters played by none other than Affan Waheed and Azfar Rehman. The crown for writing the drama goes to Madiha Shahid whereas Mazhar Moin is responsible for directing the series.Salahuddin Ayubi is a mega series on the list of latest Pakistani dramas 2022. The series includes actors from both Pakistan and Turkey. The mega-star studded series is co-produced by both the countries and may soon come out to our screens. As per reports, three seasons of the show will be shot in Turkey. The cast from Pakistan includes Ushnah Shah, Farhan Ali Agha, Adnan Siddiqi, and Ayesha Omar.This one will definitely excite you. Kaala Doriya is a family-centred play that is set to air in 2022. The drama will be an emotional ride with romance and betrayal down the road of the storyline. Samia Akram has penned down Kaala Doriya and we can expect it to be incredible just like her previous projects including Suno Chanda and Chupke Chupke. The cast of this drama is the major highlight. We will be seeing a very unique on screen pairing for the first time ever. The drama involves Farhan Saeed and Sana Javed in the lead roles.We hope you loved knowing about the latest Pakistani dramas 2022 that are set to come out soon this year. For more drama updates, stay tuned.Here are the top 10 dramas that you definitely need to check out in 2022. 