Here we create a list of Top 10 Most Beautiful Pakistani Actresses List 2021 with photos. In this list, we also describe the short biography & career of these Top 10 Most Beautiful Pakistani Actresses. In this list, we collect the top 10 gorgeous actresses across Pakistan.




Mahira Hafeez Khan well known as Mahira Khan is a famous actress in the Pakistan film industry. Khan is most popular for depicting the role of Khirad Ehsan in Momina Duraid’s Humsafar for which she got Lux Style Awards due to her best acting skills. Her date of birth is 21 December 1984. Her present age is 36 Years. She made her screen debut in the film Bol (2011), inverse Atif Aslam which earned a Lux Style Award for Best Actress selection. In 2019, she played the main role in Superstar, her most elevated netting film locally at that point.More Read…..Mahira KhanSajal Aly is a beautiful Pakistani actress. She got acclaim for her best role in the ARY Digital family drama Mehmoodabad Ki Malkin. She was born on 17 January 1994 in Lahore, Punjab, Pakistan. Presently, she is 27 years as in 2021. Sajal made her Bollywood film career debut in the Hindi film Mom (2017) inverse Sridevi. Aly likewise sang the song for the arrangement O Rangreza, in which she plays the role of Sassi. She depicts the role of Chammi in the period show Aangan of Hum TV.More Detail…Sajal AliKinza Khan, known by her stage name Ayeza Khan is a talented Pakistani TV actress. Due to her best acting skills, Khan won lead roles in TV programs including Zard Mausam (2012), Adhoori Aurat (2013), Pyarey Afzal (2014), Tum Kon Piya (2016), Mohabbat Tumse Nafrat Hai (2017) & Koi Chand Rakh (2018). She gets basic recognition for her depiction role of Mehwish in Mere Paas Tum Ho. Her date of birth is 15 January 1991. Her present age is 30 years. And her best performance in the social show Pyarey Afzal earned her basic praise and Lux Style Award for Best Television Actress. She earned critical acclaim and Pakistan International Screen Award for Best Television Actress in the romantic drama Meray Paas Tum Ho.More Read… Ayeza KhanSaba Qamar is a popular Pakistani on-screen actress and TV presenter. One of the most generously compensated actresses in Pakistan. Qamar is the beneficiary of a few honors including four Lux Style Awards, a Hum Award, and a Filmfare Award. The Government of Pakistan respected her with two of the nation’s most noteworthy regular citizen praises, the Tamgha-e-Imtiaz in 2012, and Pride of Performance in 2016. Her best performance in the drama Baaghi earned her Lux Style Award for Best Television Actress. Her date of birth is 05 April 1984. And her present age is 37 years.Mehwish Hayat is a delightful Pakistani film on-screen actress who is known for her best roles in Load Wedding, Punjab Nahi Jaungi, and Actor in Law. She was regarded by the Government of Pakistan with the Tamgha-e-Imtiaz in 2019. She was born on 06 January 1983 in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan. Presently, she is 38 years. The 2012 blockbuster sentiment sequential Meray Qatil Meray Dildar denoted a critical defining moment in Hayat’s profession, winning her acclaim and selection for Best actress at Lux Style Awards. She later won the Lux Style Awards for Best TV Actress for her depiction of a solid headed in Kashif Nisar’s praise arrangement Kami Reh Gayi (2013).Maryam Tanveer, known by her stage name Maya Ali, is a lovely Pakistani actress, model, and VJ. She is known for her roles in Pakistani TV shows and the film industry. She made her film career debut in the dramatization film Teefa in Trouble inverse Ali Zafar and tailed it with the main role in lighthearted comedy film Parey Hut Love (2019) inverse Sheheryar Munawar. Her date of birth is 27 July 1989. Her present age is 31 years. She likewise acted in the eighteenth Lux Style Awards. And she showed up on various TV morning shows. She works as a diplomat for various brands, for example, a lux, Qmobile, diva body splash, regal fan.https://www.instagram.com/p/BlbN6bOBZ0f/?utm_source=ig_web_copy_linkSanam Baloch is a renowned Pakistani actress and TV moderator. She is one of the most adored and most generously compensated actresses in Pakistan. And she has hosted different network shows, for example, Sanam Small Room on KTN and the morning appear on Samaa TV. She was born on 15 July 1986 in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan. Presently, she is 34 years. She wedded Abdullah Farhatullah who additionally has a show on Samaa TV. Presently she has “Morning Show” on Samaa TV. Pakistani movies like Bin Roye and Balu Mahi and numerous others were likewise offered to Sanam Baloch in certainty she had marked Bin Roye too however later she dropped the agreement with Hum TV in lieu of her morning appearance with ARY News and her wedding.Mawra Hocane or Mawra Hussain is an excellent Pakistani model and actress. Her date of birth is 28 September 1992. Her present age is 28 years. Hocane acted in Pakistani TV sequential shows Aahista, Ik Tamanna Lahasil Si, and Nikhar Gaye Gulab Sare. She made her Hindi film debut in the Indian sentiment film, Sanam Teri Kasam, inverse Harshvardhan Rane. And she made her debut in the Pakistani film industry with Jawani Phir Nahi Ani 2. She exhibited brilliant marriage couture for architect Nilofer Shahid. She was a work of art for designer HSY creation. As of 2019, she has propelled her apparel line as a team with her sister Urwa Hocane.Aiman Khan is a beautiful Pakistani TV on-screen actress. Her performance in Ishq Tamasha (2018) and Baandi (2018) earned her selection for Best Actress at Hum Awards. She has set up herself as a main on-screen actress in the Urdu broadcast industry. She was born on 20 November 1998 in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan. Presently, she is 22 years. She has a place with a Urdu Speaking family from Karachi. Khan wedded Muneeb Butt in Karachi on 21 November 2018. The couple played out their first Umrah during Ramadan 2019. The couple had a little girl, Amal Muneeb in 2019. In January 2020, Khan got one of Pakistan’s most well-known VIPs on Instagram, with in excess of 5 million followers.Ayesha Khan is a well-known Pakistani previous TV and film actress. Her prominent roles incorporate Mahgul from Khuda Mera Bhi Hai, Noor from Noor-e-Zindagi, and Jeena from Mann Mayal. Her date of birth is 27 September 1982. And her present age is 38 years. In 2010, Khan showed up in five dramatization serials, Vasl, Parsa, and Chooti si Kahani. In 2011, she showed up as Parveen in dramatization sequential Zip Bus Chup Raho. She next featured in dramatization sequential Tum ho ke chup and Kuch Pyar Ka Pagalpan. She additionally showed up in Kaafir (2011). In 2013, she featured in Mujhe Khuda Pe Yaqeen Hai and Shuck. She is additionally a business model. She recently showed up in the most-watched famous shows, for example, Mann Mayal, Noor-e-Zindagi, and Khuda Mera Bhi Hai.Top 10 Highest Paid Pakistani ActressesTop 10 Most Beautiful Pakistani ModelsAll Top 10 Lists By Celebs Updates