Here we describe the list of Top 10 Highest Paid Pakistani Actresses List 2021, Top 10 Most Beautiful Pakistani Actresses List 2021.




Ayesha Khan is a well-known Pakistani previous TV and film, on-screen actress. Her most popular roles incorporate Mahgul from Khuda Mera Bhi Hai, Noor from Noor-e-Zindagi, and Jeena from Mann Mayal. Her date of birth is 27 September 1982 in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan. And her present age is 39 years.Ayesha made her  TV career debut in 2000 in the dramatization sequential “Tum Yahi Kehna”. Khan wedded her life partner Major Uqbah Hadeed Malik, through whom her relative is PTI MNA Asma Qadeer.Aamina Sheikh is a talented Pakistani actress and previous model. One of the most generously compensated on-screen actresses. Sheikh was born on 29 August 1981 in New York City, New York, United States. Presently, she is later 40 years of age.Aamina began her profession with modeling. In 2012, Sheikh made her film career debut in the social show Seedlings, a film industry hit.Saira Yousuf Khan also called Syra Shehroz is a beautiful Pakistani model and on-screen actress and previous VJ. She is one of Pakistan’s most generously compensated actresses Pakistan. Her date of birth is 20 April 1988 in Karachi, Pakistan. Her present age is 33 years.She made her acting career debut in Hum TV sequential Mera Naseeb. She made her film debut nearby her significant other in the 2015 film Love You Babylicious.Mahnoor Baloch is a lovely Pakistani on-screen actress, movie director, and former model. Baloch made her TV debut in 1993 with the dramatization sequential Marvi broadcast on PTV. Mahnoor Baloch was born on 14 July 1970 in Texas, United States. Presently, she is later 51 years of age. In 1993, she made her acting career debut in the TV sequential Marvi which was coordinated by Sultana Siddiqui.In 2013, Baloch made her Hollywood presentation in Torn playing the role of Maryam, a mother whose high school child is slaughtered in a blast at a rural shopping center.Sajal Ali is a beautiful & popular Pakistani actress. She was born on 17 January 1994 in Lahore, Punjab, Pakistan. Her recent age is 27 years. She has also participated in Hindi movies. And she is famous for her role in the family drama Mehmoodabad Ki Malkin.Sajal’s first appearance on screen was a minor role in Geo TV’s parody dramatization “Nadaaniyaan” in 2009. Her performance in the teenager drama Nanhi (2013) & the romance drama Khuda Dekh Raha Hai (2015), earned her across-the-board acknowledgment just as the Lux Style Award for Best Actress nomination. See more Biography…Mehwish Hayat is a famous Pakistani film actress. She is famous for her best movies like Load Wedding, Punjab Nahi Jaungi, and Actor in Law. Her date of birth is 6 January 1988 in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan. Her present age is 33 years.She later won the Lux Style Awards for Best TV Actress for her depiction of a solid headed in Kashif Nisar’s approval arrangement Kami Reh Gayi (2013).Sanam credited as Sanam is a well-known Pakistani on-screen actress and TV moderator. Her date of birth is 14 July 1986 in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan. Her present age is 35 years of age. She is one of the most adored and most generously compensated actresses in Pakistan. She hosted the morning show Morning With Hum on Hum TV.She wedded Abdullah Farhatullah who additionally has a show on Samaa TV.Ainy Jaffri Rahman known as Ainy Jaffri is a beautiful Pakistani actress and model. She was born on 9 June 1981 in Karachi, Pakistan. Presently, she is later 40 years. Ainy at first began her career in an advertising company.In 2013 she made her film debut in Humayun Saeed’s generation Main Hoon Shahid Afridi. She additionally showed up in Balu Mahi with Osman Khalid Butt, a film by Haissam Hussain.Sabahat Qamar Zaman known as Saba Qamar is a talented Pakistani actress & television personality. She is one of the most popular & highest-paid actresses in Pakistan. Her date of birth is 05 April 1984. Her current age is 37 years. Saba Qamar won several awards, including the Lux Style Award, Hum Award, and Filmfare Award nominations.In 2007, Qamar showed up in ATV’s Khuda Gawah which was the change of 1992 Indian film of a similar name and Jinnah Ke Naam. Qamar’s debut film was Aina inverse Faysal Qureshi for which she was selected for Best Actress at Tarang Housefull Awards. The film was made on a major budget and performed poorly in the cinematic world with a lifetime accumulation of Rs 5.05 crore. She was likewise selected for ARY Films Awards for Best Supporting Actress. See More…Mahira Hafeez Khan is a famous Pakistani actress. Khan is best known for depicting the role of Khirad Ehsan in Momina Duraid’s Humsafar. Her date of birth is 21 December 1984 in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan. Her present age is 36 years of age. Mahira Khan began her career as a VJ in 2006, facilitating the live show Most Wanted on MTV Pakistan which was disclosed three days per week.In 2011, Khan made her movie career debut in a supporting role in Shoaib Mansoor-coordinated Bol in which she had a supporting role. She wedded Askari in 2007 of every customary Islamic wedding function notwithstanding Khan’s dad being against this marriage. She brought forth their child, Azlan. The couple separated in 2015. See more…