
The entertainment industry contains an unusually broad range of companies involved in businesses such as telecommunications services, television, music, video games, and live concerts. While there are many niche players, the industry is dominated by large media companies. During the COVID-19 pandemic, entertainment companies offering streaming video games and movie entertainment have thrived. But companies that operate theme parks or offer live concerts have been badly hurt.

These are the 10 biggest entertainment companies by 12-month trailing (TTM) revenue. This list is limited to companies that are publicly traded in the U.S. or Canada, either directly or through ADRs. Some foreign companies may report semiannually, and so may have longer lag times. All data are courtesy of YCharts as of September 8, 2020, except market cap numbers, which are for September 9, 2020.﻿﻿
Some of the stocks below are only traded over-the-counter (OTC) in the U.S., not on exchanges. Trading OTC stocks often carries higher trading costs than trading stocks on exchanges. This can lower or even outweigh potential returns.
Comcast is a global media and technology conglomerate that was originally founded as a cable company in the 1960s. In the decades since, Comcast has grown through mergers and acquisitions, buying major companies including media conglomerate NBCUniversal, movie producer DreamWorks Animation, and television services company XUMO in the process. Comcast offers broadband, cable and network television, streaming internet, phone, and other related products, as well as television and film production.

Disney is a diversified global entertainment company that operates theme parks, resorts, a cruise line, broadcast television networks, and other businesses. One of the company's most recent additions is the entertainment streaming service, Disney+, launched in fall of 2019. The company produces an array of new television and film content for this service, in addition to providing streaming access to preexisting content. Disney's Parks, Experiences, and Products segment, and its Media Networks segment, are its two largest sources of revenue.

Charter is a telecommunications company offering cable broadcasting, internet, and voice services to businesses and consumers customers across the U.S. The company's Spectrum brand provides cable TV, internet, and home phone services to more than 30 million customers. Spectrum Networks and Spectrum Originals distribute news coverage, sports, and original programming.

ViacomCBS is a global multimedia company that's the product of the 2019 merger of CBS and Viacom. The company operates cable networks, content production and distribution, television stations, and digital streaming services, as well as a variety of other internet-based businesses and consumer publishing.

Bolloré SA is a diversified French holding company operating across a wide variety of industries, including media and advertising. Bolloré is a major stakeholder in Vivendi, the French mass media conglomerate which is also included on this list. Bolloré best known as a paper, transportation and logistics company, though it's also involved in energy distribution, rubber and palm oil production.

One of the leading streaming services worldwide, Netflix offers a variety of TV and movie entertainment services. Originally based on DVD rental services, Netflix now gets a majority of its business revenue from a subscription-based streaming model. In recent years, the company also has dramatically increased its production of original movie programming, winning a number of Academy Awards. These original movies and shows have been important to its revenue dominance in the entertainment streaming industry.

Vivendi is a French mass media conglomerate that provides entertainment content and services across many platforms. The company provides digital and pay television services, develops and distributes interactive entertainment, provides telecommunications services, and more. One of Vivendi's largest operations is Universal Music Group, which one of the world's biggest music companies and home to dozens of music labels.﻿﻿

Japanese entertainment company Nintendo develops and sells video game hardware and software. One of the most widely recognized and established brands in the growing video game industry, Nintendo's most recent releases include popular titles such as Animal Crossing: New Horizons, and the Zelda and Super Mario franchises.

DISH offers direct broadcast satellite subscription television services, as well as interactive television programming, audio programming, and related products. Through partnerships, the company also offers internet and other services in packaged bundles. The company's Sling TV video streaming service competes with Netflix and Amazon.

Fox Corp. develops and licenses a variety of programming including news, entertainment, sports, and other content. The company distributes its programming through broadcast and cable television, direct broadcast satellite services, and online streaming video platforms. Fox also manages production facilities including studios, sound stages, editing bays, and theaters.
YCharts. "YCharts." Accessed Sept. 8, 2020.Vivendi SA. "Vivendi in brief." Accessed Sept. 8, 2020.
Fundamental Analysis
Company Profiles
International Markets
Marijuana Investing
Top Stocks
Business Leaders