Here we describe the list of Most Handsome Lollywood Actors/Most Handsome Actors in Pakistan. In this list, we gather the Top 10 Most Handsome Actors from the Lollywood film industry. We likewise depict the short history of these Most Handsome Pakistani Actors. We depict their Date of Birth, Age, Film Debut, Career Debut, and mainstream motion pictures of these Most Handsome Lollywood Actors.Check Also: Most Handsome Bollywood Actors 




Fawad Afzal Khan is a popular Pakistani actor, maker, screenwriter, model, and artist. He has gotten a few honors for his best roles including a Filmfare Award, three Lux Style Awards, and six Hum Awards. His date of birth is 29 November 1981 in Lahore, Punjab, Pakistan. Presently, he is ongoing 39 years.Khan played a lead part in the Pakistani TV sequential Humsafar (2011), and showed up in Sultana Siddiqui’s dramatization Zindagi Gulzar Hai (2012). For the two best performances, he got the Lux Style Award for Best Actor. Khan made his Bollywood film debut in Khoobsurat (2014), for which he got the Filmfare Award.Bilal Ashraf is a talented Pakistani movie actor and enhanced visualizations director. In 2019, he played the main function in Mohammed Ehteshamuddin’s first time at the helm, Superstar, created by Momina Duraid and with Mahira Khan as co-star. Genius turns into the most noteworthy netting film for Bilal Ashraf.He has named Pink Floyd as his unsurpassed most loved band, has picked Scent of a Woman as the film which pushed him to turn into an actor while he additionally portrayed chiseling and painting as his “concealed abilities.” He was born on 10 October 1979 in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan. His present age is 41 years.Ahad Raza Mir is a skilled Canadian-Pakistani actor and artist. He is known for his appearance in the melodic show Coke Studio. Mir has set up a profession in Pakistan and is likewise got a Lux Style Award. Mir got back to Pakistan and first earned acknowledgment with the TV arrangement Sammi (2017). The main part in the sentimental shows Yaqeen Ka Safar (2017) winning him a Lux Style Award for Best Actor.Mir set up himself by depicting a military pilot in the battle war film Parwaaz Hay Junoon (2018) and a military official in the well-known show Ehd-e-Wafa (2019). His date of birth is 29 September 1993 in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan. His current age is 27 years.Ahsan Khan is a celebrated Pakistani film and TV actor, maker, host, and performer. He started his career in 1998. He earned a degree in English writing at Government College University. As indicated by Khan, his dad is half-Pashtun and his mom is Punjabi. He also featured in the romantic film Chupan Chupai inverse Neelam Muneer. The film was a business achievement.Khan was also selected as a CLF Goodwill Ambassador by the Children’s Literature Festival on 30 July 2019. In 2019, he played an urgent part in the acclaimed TV arrangement Alif. He played the best character in the parody arrangement Shahrukh Ki Saiyan. In 2020, he featured in the sentimental TV arrangement Bandhay Aik Dor Say. He was born on 09 October 1981 in London, England. Presently, he is late 39 years.Danish Taimoor is a popular Pakistani actor and model. His date of birth is 16 February 1983 in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan. His present age is 38 years. Danish showed up a little appearance in “Dil Diya Dehleez” (2009). His outstanding works incorporate Massi Aur Malika, Chudween Ka Chand, Mannchalay, Kuch Unkahi Batain, Koi Jane Na, Larkiyan Muhalley Ki, and Lamha Zindagi.He likewise showed up best roles in telefilms including Pappu Ki Padoosan, Neeli Chatri, Love Hit Tou Life Hit, and Piano Girl. He wedded lovely actress Ayeza Khan in the wake of being in a relationship with her for 7–8 years. And he made his movie debut Jalaibee (2015), coordinated by Yasir Jaswal.Imran Abbas Naqvi is a talented Pakistani actor, artist, and previous model. He is known for his best appearance in TV serials Meri Zaat Zarra-e-Benishan (2009), Khuda Aur Muhabbat (2011), Mera Naam Yusuf Hai (2015), Mohabbat Tumse Nafrat Hai (2017), and Koi Chand Rakh Meri Shaam Par (2018). Abbas started his profession at 22 years old as a model.Abbas made his debut in Bollywood inverse Bipasha Basu in Creature 3D, for which he was assigned at Filmfare Award. He is also highlighted in Jaanisaar close by Pernia Qureshi. His date of birth is 15 October 1982 in Islamabad, Pakistan. Presently, he is 38 years.Bilal Abbas Khan is a celebrated Pakistani actor. Khan made his acting debut with the best role in Saya-Deewar Bhi Nahi. He has played the part of Qasim in the show O Rangreza. He further showed up in Balaa for which he won Social Media Award and got an assignment at Lux Style Award. And later showed up in crime dramatization Cheekh and showed up as Navy Officer Behram in telefilm Laal.His dad filled in as DSP Karachi and his mom is a style architect, while he has two siblings and a sister. He was born on 04 June 1993 in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan. Presently, His current age is 27 years.Fahad Salahuddin, also called Fahad Mustafa, is a celebrated Pakistani film and TV actor, maker, and host. He is additionally known for hosting the game show Jeeto Pakistan. He made his film debut in the best role in Na Maloom Afraad.In 2016, he was featured in Anjum Shahzad’s Mah e Mir and Qureshi’s Actor in Law. Actor in Law excelled in the cinema world winning the Film of the Year Award in the sixteenth Lux Style Awards, where Mustafa likewise won the Best Actor Award. His date of birth is 26 June 1983 in Larkana, Sindh, Pakistan. His present age is 37 years.Imran Ashraf Awan is a capable Pakistani actor and author. He began his expert career in 2011. He has picked up acknowledgment and approval for his best appearance in Dil Lagi, Alif Allah Aur Insaan, Dil Mom Ka Diya, Tabeer, Ranjha Kardi, and Kahin Deep Jaley. And he picked up fame and basic recognition for his performance in Alif Allah Aur Insaan and won an honor at the sixth Hum Awards.In 2018, he composed dramatization chronic Tabeer and was designated for the Best author at seventh murmur grants. Presently he will be found in the film Dum Mastam close by Amar Khan. He will likewise be seen close by Urwa Hocane in the dramatization of Mushq which is additionally composed by Imran himself.Muneeb Butt is a capable Pakistani actor. He likewise works in Urdu film and TV. He began acting professionally in 2012 and from that point forward showed up in numerous prominent TV serials. His ongoing best appearances incorporate Daldal (2017), Baandi (2018), Koi Chand Rakh (2018), and Yaariyan (2019).Butt was engaged to beautiful actress Aiman Khan with whom he has worked in numerous serials Bay Qasoor (2015), Googly Muhalla (2015), and Baandi (2018). The couple got wedded in 2018. The couple had a child in 2019. His date of birth is 14 April 1992 in Karachi, Sindh Pakistan. His present age is 29 years.