The Pakistani fashion world is much diverse and ethnically beautiful than any other fashion industries out there. They have created their brand and name in the fashion industry. Pakistani designers showcase their talents with their unique and variety of designs ranging from modern to traditional wears. Their diversity in clothing attracts people from all over the world, putting them at one of the top places in the fashion industry. All these can’t be possible without their amazing and glamorous Pakistani fashion models.It is a well-known fact that Pakistani female models mostly dominate the Pakistani fashion world. They represent elegance, beauty and style in their individual way. And here is the top 10 list of Pakistani female models.A post shared by Sadaf Sabzwari (@sadafkanwal) on May 7, 2020 at 9:10am PDT Sadaf Kanwal is a multi-talented personality. She is considered as the representative of younger Pakistani fashion models in the industry. At just 24 she has ventured into modelling, acting, fashion shows and even a brand ambassador to a popular brand and she has won many awards for her contribution to the fashion world. With 1.1 million followers on Instagram Sadaf promotes her work and display her lifestyle to her fansA post shared by Mehreen Syed (@imehreensyed) on Apr 6, 2018 at 8:08am PDT She has been a Pakistani fashion model for a very long time. She is well known all over the world for her elegance and great styling sense. She is an entrepreneur and founder of many fashion schools in Pakistan. Without a doubt, she has got many awards which include 6th Sexiest Asian Female in the UK.Mehreen Syed also starred in many music videos and films, and she considers herself a proud momma of two. She has 498k followers on Instagram.A post shared by Ayyan (@ayyanworld) on Jun 24, 2014 at 1:56am PDT Ayyan began her modelling journey in 2010 when she was only 16, and from there she had made sure to only taste success. Like every other Pakistani model, Ayyan is versatile. Apart from being the most popular Pakistani model, she is a singer too. She has won many awards such as “Miss Calvin Klein Beauty”, “Best Female Model”, and “Best Icon of the Year”. Her Instagram has 189k followersA post shared by Nadia Hussain Khan (@nadiahussain_khan) on Jun 28, 2020 at 5:22am PDT It’s hard to imagine a model that can be a mother to four and still glide her way through the fashion industry as a successful Pakistani model, but Nadia Hussain makes it all look easy. Nadia’s cap still contains many feathers, she is also a dentist, a swimmer and an actress. It all started only when she was 19, and she still looks energetic. This model shares her make up tricks and style with her Instagram family of 719k occasionally.A post shared by Mehreen Raheal( Officialpage) (@mehreenraheal) on Dec 15, 2019 at 12:51am PST Number four in our list is Pakistani fashion model Mehreen Raheel, who comes from a family of actors. Therefore she made sure to put her foot in every industry possible. She started her career as a model when she was just eight years old and has appeared in many commercials, movies and series from then. She is also the managing director of her family company. As of now, Mehreen has 53.3k followers on Instagram A post shared by Mehwish Hayat (@mehwishhayatofficial) on Oct 31, 2019 at 9:06am PDT This Pakistani fashion model is made famous through her acting skills. She has acted in many series and was even honoured by the Government of Pakistan with Tamgha-e-Imtiaz which is given to people based on their achievements and service to the government. Mehwish Hayat has been nominated to many other prestigious awards and has won some. she has a whopping 3.7 million followers on InstagramA post shared by Sunita Marshall (@sunitamarshallofficial) on Dec 3, 2019 at 7:36am PST This Diva has been introduced to the fashion industry by her aunt, and she never looked back. This 39-year-old Pakistani fashion model is now married and has two children. Sunita Marshall has starred in many television series and has been nominated to many awards which include “Lux Style Award for Best Model” and “Hum Award for Best Model”. This gorgeous woman got 463k Instagram followers.A post shared by Rabia Rashid (@iamrabiabutt) on Feb 8, 2020 at 12:22am PST Rabia Butt is a 28 years old Pakistani fashion model and an actress emerging from Lahore. She started her career in 2008 and has been nominated many times for Best Female Model. Her main focus was in modelling, but later it changed into acting. Her debut movie was Hijrat. Her Instagram followers count is 276k.A post shared by Ainy Jaffri Rahman (@ainy_jaffri_rahman) on Mar 11, 2019 at 7:24am PDT Jaffri started her career initially at an Advertising company and then she went onto act in various dramas. She was once also a voice actor. She is one of the most wanted Pakistani fashion models in the industry with many designer brands wishing to work with her. Her Instagram growth contains 767k followers.A post shared by Sabeeka Imam (@sabeekaimam) on Sep 30, 2019 at 1:01pm PDT Most people know Sabeeka Imam from her successful Urdu movies, but she is also the top most popular Pakistani fashion model. It was modelling, which started her career in the first place. Though of Pakistani origin, Sabeeka was born in Britain, therefore, making her famous worldwide. Instagram followers count is 136k.This concludes the list of Top 10 Pakistani female fashion models; however, there are many more models who deserve much more recognition.With new faces swarming into the Pakistani fashion industry, there will be numerous brand new talents and models to look forward to.– Posted by Rahmath RilaPrev PostNext PostGet Notified for the Latest Collections & Offers!Have a question? You may find an answer in our FAQs.But you can also contact us:Call Us: 080 7196 8666WhatsApp Us: 91 8630301299Mon-Sat: 11:00 am - 7:00 pmSend us an emailCopyright © 2020, YourLibaas.WHAT ARE YOU LOOKING FOR?Empty resultSUBTOTALDo you want to add products to your personal account?