Instep gives you a lowdown on 5 telefilms that will entertain you during the Eid holidays.

Eid is a time when most filmmakers decide to release their movies though this year is a little slow for Pakistan with just the Mehwish Hayat and Azfar Rehman-starrer Chhalawa and Yasir Nawaz’s Wrong No. 2, featuring Neelam Muneer and Sami Khan releasing across Pakistan. Bollywood films are not yet back in local cinemas and we have 4 international releases to choose from – Godzilla: King of the Monsters, Aladdin, The Secret Life of Pets 2 and John Wick 3, if you haven’t already seen them. These titles will surely draw people to the cinemas over the holidays.While not everyone can or would want to head out to the cinema to watch the recent releases, many will rely on the multiple telefilms that are scheduled to air on television, to keep them entertained during the festive occasion. Many TV channels will air interesting new telefilms this Eid; Geo Entertainment will repeat three of their former hits - Mehreen Jabbar’s Dino Ki Dulhaniya; patriotic telefilm Laal (that went on air on Pakistan Day), and Rok Sako Tou Rok Lo. So, if you didn’t get to watch these before, here’s your second chance.Let’s help you decide which ones you’ll want to watch…Help Me DurdanaOne telefilm to look forward to this Eid is Help Me Durdana. Directed by Aabis Raza, it features Ushna Shah and Yasir Hussain, appearing together for the first time. “It is a comedy in which I am playing a double role; one male and the other female. This is the very first time that I am portraying the role of a woman on television,” Yasir Hussain told Instep. “There comes a situation where the hero, Dino, has to play the role of his own mother, Durdana, in order to impress his in-laws,” he added. The actor also shared that his character Durdana will be seen wearing saris by renowned designers such as Nomi Ansari and Asim Jofa. Apart from Yasir and Ushna, the telefilm stars veteran actors Mehmood Aslam and Zulqarnain Haider in important roles. Shaadi ImpossibleAnother telefilm that promises to be entertaining is Yumna Zaidi and Affan Waheed-starrer Shaadi Impossible. In the telefilm, written by Adeel Raza and directed by Mohsin Talat, Yumna essays the character of a broad-minded girl, whose father and grandmother are desperately trying to get her married off. Affan Waheed plays the role of an arrogant guy, who has been raised by a single mother, essayed by Saman Ansari. Regarding the plot of the story, Saman Ansari shared in an earlier interview with Instep, “Since she works in an advertising agency, her job requires her to travel and, being a single mother, she worries about her son whenever she is away. She plans to get her son married and starts looking for a girl. This is where the role of the female lead, (Yumna Zaidi), comes into play.” The actress also revealed that Shaadi Impossible “has underlying humour to it but it’s not in your face crazy, we-are-trying-to-be-funny”. Let’s see what this light-hearted telefilm has in store for the audience.Dino Ki DulhaniyaMehreen Jabbar’s Dino Ki Dulhaniya was aired last year on Eid ul Fitr on Geo TV. The project, that marked Mehreen Jabbar’s return to television after a small hiatus, stars Feroze Khan and Sana Javed in key roles; the hit onscreen pair also appeared in blockbuster Khaani and the recently concluded Romeo Weds Heer. The telefilm follows the story of Dino who meets a girl, Noor in the process of taking over the family property and ultimately falls in love with her.Produced by Abdullah Kadwani and Asad Qureshi under the banner of 7th Sky Entertainment and penned by Dr. Muhammad Younis Butt, Dino Ki Dulhaniya also stars Shamim Hilaly and Ali Ansari in important roles.  Jhaanki TaakiThe telefilm, which is directed by Kashif Saleem, stars Hina Dilpazeer, Nadia Khan, Azfar Rehman and model turned actress Amna Ilyas, who is gearing up for the release of her upcoming movie, Baaji. “It is a light hearted, fun telefilm that the audience will definitely love,” Amna Ilyas told Instep on the sidelines of an event. According to the model turned actress, the plot revolves around the concept of watta satta (exchange marriages). Hina Dilpazeer wants her daughter (Amna Ilyas) to get married to her daughter-in-law’s (Nadia Khan) brother, essayed by Azfar Rehman. However Nadia Khan’s character is totally against this marriage and wants her brother to tie the knot to a girl belonging to a well off family. Sounds interesting!Raja Ki Chandni This Eid, viewers are in for a treat as the Muqaabil duo, Mohsin Abbas Haider and Kubra Khan, will be once again be sharing screen space in the rom-com, titled Raja Ki Chandni. The telefilm is directed by Kamran Abbas Khan and follows the story of Raja (essayed by Mohsin Abbas) who is trying to woo Chandni (Kubra Khan). Will Raja be able to win Chandni’s heart? We’ll get to know tonight.Eid is a time when most filmmakers decide to release their movies though this year is a little slow for Pakistan with just the Mehwish Hayat and Azfar Rehman-starrer Chhalawa and Yasir Nawaz’s Wrong No. 2, featuring Neelam Muneer and Sami Khan releasing across Pakistan. Bollywood films are not yet back in local cinemas and we have 4 international releases to choose from – Godzilla: King of the Monsters, Aladdin, The Secret Life of Pets 2 and John Wick 3, if you haven’t already seen them. These titles will surely draw people to the cinemas over the holidays.While not everyone can or would want to head out to the cinema to watch the recent releases, many will rely on the multiple telefilms that are scheduled to air on television, to keep them entertained during the festive occasion. Many TV channels will air interesting new telefilms this Eid; Geo Entertainment will repeat three of their former hits - Mehreen Jabbar’s Dino Ki Dulhaniya; patriotic telefilm Laal (that went on air on Pakistan Day), and Rok Sako Tou Rok Lo. So, if you didn’t get to watch these before, here’s your second chance.Let’s help you decide which ones you’ll want to watch…Help Me DurdanaOne telefilm to look forward to this Eid is Help Me Durdana. Directed by Aabis Raza, it features Ushna Shah and Yasir Hussain, appearing together for the first time. “It is a comedy in which I am playing a double role; one male and the other female. This is the very first time that I am portraying the role of a woman on television,” Yasir Hussain told Instep. “There comes a situation where the hero, Dino, has to play the role of his own mother, Durdana, in order to impress his in-laws,” he added. The actor also shared that his character Durdana will be seen wearing saris by renowned designers such as Nomi Ansari and Asim Jofa. Apart from Yasir and Ushna, the telefilm stars veteran actors Mehmood Aslam and Zulqarnain Haider in important roles. Shaadi ImpossibleAnother telefilm that promises to be entertaining is Yumna Zaidi and Affan Waheed-starrer Shaadi Impossible. In the telefilm, written by Adeel Raza and directed by Mohsin Talat, Yumna essays the character of a broad-minded girl, whose father and grandmother are desperately trying to get her married off. Affan Waheed plays the role of an arrogant guy, who has been raised by a single mother, essayed by Saman Ansari. Regarding the plot of the story, Saman Ansari shared in an earlier interview with Instep, “Since she works in an advertising agency, her job requires her to travel and, being a single mother, she worries about her son whenever she is away. She plans to get her son married and starts looking for a girl. This is where the role of the female lead, (Yumna Zaidi), comes into play.” The actress also revealed that Shaadi Impossible “has underlying humour to it but it’s not in your face crazy, we-are-trying-to-be-funny”. Let’s see what this light-hearted telefilm has in store for the audience.Dino Ki DulhaniyaMehreen Jabbar’s Dino Ki Dulhaniya was aired last year on Eid ul Fitr on Geo TV. The project, that marked Mehreen Jabbar’s return to television after a small hiatus, stars Feroze Khan and Sana Javed in key roles; the hit onscreen pair also appeared in blockbuster Khaani and the recently concluded Romeo Weds Heer. The telefilm follows the story of Dino who meets a girl, Noor in the process of taking over the family property and ultimately falls in love with her.Produced by Abdullah Kadwani and Asad Qureshi under the banner of 7th Sky Entertainment and penned by Dr. Muhammad Younis Butt, Dino Ki Dulhaniya also stars Shamim Hilaly and Ali Ansari in important roles.  Jhaanki TaakiThe telefilm, which is directed by Kashif Saleem, stars Hina Dilpazeer, Nadia Khan, Azfar Rehman and model turned actress Amna Ilyas, who is gearing up for the release of her upcoming movie, Baaji. “It is a light hearted, fun telefilm that the audience will definitely love,” Amna Ilyas told Instep on the sidelines of an event. According to the model turned actress, the plot revolves around the concept of watta satta (exchange marriages). Hina Dilpazeer wants her daughter (Amna Ilyas) to get married to her daughter-in-law’s (Nadia Khan) brother, essayed by Azfar Rehman. However Nadia Khan’s character is totally against this marriage and wants her brother to tie the knot to a girl belonging to a well off family. Sounds interesting!Raja Ki Chandni This Eid, viewers are in for a treat as the Muqaabil duo, Mohsin Abbas Haider and Kubra Khan, will be once again be sharing screen space in the rom-com, titled Raja Ki Chandni. The telefilm is directed by Kamran Abbas Khan and follows the story of Raja (essayed by Mohsin Abbas) who is trying to woo Chandni (Kubra Khan). Will Raja be able to win Chandni’s heart? We’ll get to know tonight.Date: 