Pakistani dramas are continuing to win hearts across the globe. This year, many new dramas as well as actors made their debuts and the fans can not stop loving them. While tis may be true, there is a major paradigm shift in the Pakistani industry with dramas finally getting rid of conventional love stories. The modern day writers and producers are showing a lot of interest in bringing out different story elements highlighting the social issues. The recently aired dramas have made a special place in the audience’s hearts. The reason behind it is highlighting unconventional matters of the society that we fail to acknowledge. Every year, the list of best Pakistani dramas adds more names as loved and encouraged by the local as well as global audiences. Moreover, the addition of new acting faces (male and female) is also lighting a spark of interest locally. Is the scope of Pakistani drama industry finally changing for better? We would love to know your thoughts about it in the feedback section. But first, let’s talk about the top 10 Pakistani dramas to get you started.We know that if you have come here, you would be looking for the top 10 Pakistani dramas of 2021, 2020, & 2019. Let’s give you an overview of which drama performed best in Pakistan during these years. You can also check out our list of Best Pakistani Dramas 2021 here.The best way to spend leisure time specifically for the women in Pakistan is to watch dramas while having a steaming hot cup of tea or coffee while munching on snacks. Well… we should be proud of the fact that Pakistani dramas are being watched widely across the globe. So if we have a look upon the reel of the dramas for 2019, 2020, 2021, and 2022, a number of these have been marked as blockbuster serials and here we have compiled a list of the top 10 unforgettable dramas of the year:An entirely different love story from the past that changes the life of a well-settled family. Raqeeb Se is like a classical love story that has introduced some legendary actors in strong roles that are unforgettable. The main cast of this drama includes Nauman Ijaz, Hadiqa Kiani, Sania Saeed, Iqra Aziz, and Faryal Mehmood. There is a lot more to reveal in this love story so keep watching. The drama goes on-air every Wednesday at 08:00 PM on HUM TV.You can watch drama by clicking here.Dunk is another amazing drama that is going on-air while garnering much praise on ARY Digital. The main cast of the drama serial Dunk includes Nauman Ijaz, Sana Javed, and Bilal Abbas. The storyline of Dunk also covers harassment case, however, a new aspect has been brought to consideration. Every new episode opens up a new chapter of the story so, don’t miss it. You can watch it on Wednesday at 08:00 PM only on ARY Digital.You can watch drama by clicking here.Khuda Aur Muhabbat has finally gone on-air on Geo TV. The first episode made its way to screen on the 12th of February. It has a coveted cast of Iqra Aziz, Junaid Khan, and Feroze Khan. The drama is written by the same novel writer Hashim Nadeem, directed by Syed Wajahat Hussain and produced by Abdullah Kidwai and Asad Qureshi. It is the third season of one of the most popular dramas Khuda Aur Muhabbat. The story is the same but created differently for a whole new experience for viewers. Watch it every Friday at 08:00 PM on Geo TV.You can watch drama by clicking here.Raqs e Bismil Drama is a tale of sacrifices in chasing true love. As soon as this drama serial went on-air, viewers got crazy specifically after seeing Imran Ashraf in a whole new look. Brilliant actors like Sarah Khan, Zara Sheikh, Mehmood Aslam, Anoushey Abbasi, Momin Saqib and Furqan have gathered to make it the hit of the year. Raqs e Bismil is directed by Wajahat Rauf. Raqs-e-Bismal goes on air on HUM TV every Friday at 08:00 PM.You can watch drama by clicking here.One of the best new dramas is Phaans that is going on-air on HUM TV. The drama is based on a dark side of relationships and the subsequent mental and physical abuse. Although we have watched so many dramas that are based on rape and sexual abuse, however, this drama highlights how the lower class faces pressure in such a situation. The main cast of this drama includes Zara Noor Abbas, Sami Khan, Ali Tahir, Shahzad Sheikh, and Yashma Gill. You can watch the drama serial Phaans every Saturday at 08:00 PM on HUM TV.You can watch drama by clicking here.Pehli Si Muhabbat is the love story that will keep you involved with every scene till the end. The main cast of the drama serial Pehli Si Muhabbat includes Maya Ali, Sheheryar Munawar, and Hassan Sheheryar Yasin (HSY). The story revolves around how the lovebirds face the toughest of circumstances in having each other for life. It is a strong game of expressions and how the impossible is made possible while bravely fighting all the way. Don’t miss it and watch Pehli Si Muhabbat every Saturday at 08:00 PM on ARY Digital.You can watch drama by clicking here.Safar Tamam Hua is a new drama serial going on-air on HUM TV. From the first episode, this drama has portrayed family relations differently that instantly grabs our attention. Rija is the first character who caught the viewers’ attention, the one with some visible cognitive disabilities, very innocent and childlike in her behaviour. Rija is raised by Khala (Samina Ahmed), a woman with two sons of her own, Jamal (Syed Jibran) and Sami (Ali Rehman Khan). Rija’s father has left the family and remarried. She also raises Anoushey (Madiha Imam), her other brother’s daughter, a man who lives with them, but is a musician who was heavily involved with “tawaif culture” and continues to remain there emotionally and mentally. Don’t forget to watch Safar Tamam Hua on HUM TV every Monday and Tuesday at 08:00 PM.You can watch drama by clicking here.Among so many serious and emotional dramas, here we have got on the list a romantic comedy-drama serial – Shehnai that is a treat for the viewers. The drama goes on-Air on ARY Digital every Thursday at 08:00 PM.Affan Waheed and Ramsha Khan have worked together in multiple drama serials, however, this one is going to be unforgettable. Shehnai Drama has Affan Waheed as Bakht while Ramsha Khan is playing the role of Meerab.You can watch drama by clicking here.Fitoor narrates a love story that transcends above all as a person in love is bound to forget about the worries of the past and the uncertainty of the future. Despite being a successful architect, Haider feels lacking in his love life as he is still living with the memories of his love interest. On the other hand, Dilnasheen who hails from a middle-class background is deeply in love with her best friend’s brother Hamza. Both are committed to be with each other forever without realizing the difficulties they might have to overcome. Living in her present, Dilnasheen’s life takes an unfortunate turn when she crosses paths with Haider.  The main cast of this drama includes Faisal Qureshi, Wahaj, Kiran Haq, and Hiba Bukhari. Don’t forget to watch it every Tuesday at 08:00 PM only on Geo Entertainment.You can watch drama by clicking here.Qayamat is a story of a young and beautiful girl whose life decisions are dominated by those around her. Eventually, all hell breaks loose when the people closest to her repeatedly make the same mistake making her future bleak. Ifrah along with her parents and elder sister Samra belongs to the lower middle class and believes in hard work and honesty. Ifrah and Samra’s parents are put in a tough spot when Ifrah’s uncle Mukhtar asks for Samra’s hand in marriage for his son Rashid. The families agree to the proposal without taking Samra’s approval however soon after marriage Samra suffers mistreatment from Rashid until she meets a tragic incident leaving Ifrah to face the dire consequences. The main cast includes Ahsan Khan, Neelum Munir, Amar Khan, and Haroon Shahid. Don’t forget to watch the drama serial Qayamat every Wednesday at 08:00 PM.You can watch drama by clicking here.The drama serial Mere Pass Tum Ho has been the talk of the town since the time it went on air. The main cast of the drama serial includes Ayeza Khan, Humayun Saeed, and Adnan Siddiqui. It has broken all the previous records with the viewership which is still growing day by day. The story has been written by Khalil-ur-Rehman Qamar while Nadeem Baig has directed the drama serial. As far as the theme of the play is concerned, it is a rich composition of emotions defining the relationship between husband and wife specifically concerning this era. You can watch it every Saturday on ARY Digital at 08:00 pm and if you have missed the previous episodes, it is suggested to watch it on YouTube. We believe that this drama would be among the top 10 Pakistani dramas of 2019 and 2020 as well.This is our number 2 in the top 10 Pakistani drama list. This drama is based on the novel written by all-time best writer Umera Ahmad. It was the most anxiously awaited serials of this year as Umera Ahmad has never disappointed anyone with the story she stirs up with emotions. Another special thing about this drama was that Hamza Ali Abbasi was going to show up after a good long gap and fans were of the view that if Hamza is there, then it will surely be something special. The main cast of the drama includes Hamza Ali Abbasi, Sajal Ali, Kubra Khan, and Ahsan Khan. The Drama serial Alif has been directed by Haseeb Hasan. The story of this drama revolves around the spiritual element and that’s the basic attraction for the viewers. You can watch it every Saturday on Geo Entertainment at 08:00 pm.Ranjha Ranjha Kardi was such an enchanting serial of the year for the viewers. The story of this drama proved that Pakistani dramas can take you out of the world with marvellous direction by Kashif Nisar and a deep philosophical plot by Faiza Iftikhar. The main cast of this drama included Iqra Aziz, Imran Ashraf, and Syed Jibran. Imran Ashraf played the character named Bhola the fame of which touched the immortal grounds. If you want to see how the new talent of the drama industry is striving to mark excellence in terms of acting, undoubtedly Ranjha Ranjha Kardi is the best example. This blockbuster drama on-aired on Hum TV and now you can watch it on YouTube in case you have missed it.Do Bol is one of the most-watched dramas of 2019 with an amazing story that was somewhat different from the traditionally produced serials. Though Hira Mani wasn’t being considered among the notable actors of the industry before this drama, if we say that this project also proved to be a talent revealing thing for Hira, it wouldn’t be wrong. She proved it that her selection for the character in Do Bol was accurate. On the other hand, Affan Waheed acted as usual amazingly and thus the chemistry between Gaiti and Badar turned out as an everlasting enchantment for the viewers. The drama was on-aired on ARY Digital and if you have missed it, now you can watch it on YouTube.Another addition to the hit dramas of the year 2019 is Ehd-e-Wafa which is not a romance-tale but covers the remarkable journey of four friends. The drama is ISPR sponsored production and its theme is about how the four fellows strive to make their lives. The main characters of the drama include Ahad Raza Mir, Osman Khalid Butt, Wahaj Ali and Ahmed Ali Akbar. Ehd-e-Wafa has been written by Mustafa Afridi and directed by Saife Hassan. This serial is being on-aired on Hum TV every Sunday at 08:00 pm. You can also watch it on PTV Home and YouTube.Also, READ COMPLETE SYNOPSIS OF EHD E WAFA AND LISTEN TO THEIR OSTKhaas is such a drama serial that gained popularity gradually with every new episode. Initially, it seemed to be like a typical story just like other relationship makeup and break up serials but eventually, it turned out as something so interesting in terms of the twist and turns the writer Sarwat Nazir added up to the plot. Sanam Baloch outshone in a different character this time while Ali Rehman and Haroon Shahid also did an exceptional job. The drama theme covered up all those issues related to disputed marital relations which are usually not being addressed. Danish Nawaz as the director of the play superbly puts life in all the characters of this story. It was aired on Hum TV and now available on YouTube to watch. After the release of the first 3 episodes, Khass topped the top 10 Pakistani Dramas charts of 2019.All over the year, every time something is being showcased on television, the story of which revolves around something out-of-the-box or lesser addressed issues. Hashim Nadeem has been known as one of the exceptional writers and Ishq Zah-e-Naseeb is a fine piece to prove this thing. The plot of the story has an element of suspense and uniqueness as a person with split personality disorder and his married life is shown in the serial. Zahid Ahmed is playing the leading role in Ishq Zah-e-Naseeb while supporting actors include Yumna Zaidi, Sonia Hussain, Zarnish Khan, and Sami Khan. The drama is being on-aired every Friday on Hum TV at 08:00 pm. Don’t miss it!Drama serial Yaariyan is another blockbuster production of the year on-aired on Geo TV. It broke all the records and captured a good viewership. Ayeza Khan played a negative role in this serial and to watch it, even the viewers of other channels tuned into Geo. The prominent cast of this amazing drama included Junaid Khan, Ayeza Khan, Muneeb Butt, Hina Bayat, Mehmood Aslam, Moomal Sheikh, and Shagufta Bhatti. It is constantly gaining viewers on YouTube every day.  The drama has been written by Samina Ijaz while Syed Wajahat Hussain directed it excellently.Ruswai has hooked a good number of viewers since the time it is being showcased. It is one of the best ARY dramas in the recent years. The story of this drama serial revolves around sensitive yet important sexual abuse issues and specifically the stereotypical treatment of the society towards the victim. Sana Javaid is playing the leading role and Mikaal Zulfiqar is acting as her husband who is also very possessive about society’s reaction and treatment towards the victim who is no one other than his wife in the drama. Moreover, the twist has been added in the story with the old tradition of “Watta Satta” marriage. The drama is being on-aired every Tuesday on ARY Digital at 08:00 pm.The blockbuster family comedy serial Suno Chanda gathered a huge number of fans the last year and this year in continuity it has broken the record once again while bagging 2 awards for being the most liked comic serial. It has been considered as one of the best entertainment packages of the year and it was the never-ending fever sort of a feeling for the viewers, hitting the idea of the sequel of the play after success last year. The main cast of this crispy entertaining serial included Farhan Saeed, Iqra Aziz, Nadia Afghan, Farhan Agha, and others whereas the new yet wonderful inclusion of Arjumand Rahim, Raza Talish and Sabeena Farooq added up to the sweet and spicy twists of the comedy serial.Pyar Kay Sadqay is a story of two innocent lovebirds that are not much familiar with each other initially but as per the teaser, they seem to get closer by the time. The drama is a sweet romantic production and the main cast includes Yumna Zaidi as well as Bilal Abbas Khan.The different thing about this story that makes it one of the top 10 Pakistani dramas is actually the role played by Bilal Abbas Khan who has been usually playing serious roles in blockbuster dramas like ‘Cheekh’ and ‘Balaa’.The rest of the cast of this drama includes Atiqa Odho, Omair Rana, Yashma Gill, and others. You can watch the drama on Hum TV every Thursday at 08:00 PM.The story of this drama is a love story triangle. The main cast of this drama includes Ramsha Khan, Feroze Khan, and Hania Amir. The story is full of twists and turns to make it something interesting to watch for the viewers. The drama is on-aired every Monday at 08:00 PM on ARY Digital so mark it in your watch list.Another amazing drama is Jhooti staring Iqra Aziz, Ahmed Butt and Yasir Hussain in the lead roles. The story is basically about a girl who is so clever and is crazy about being married to a rich person just for the sake of money.Parizaad is the most-watched and most-loved drama of this year. The drama is still airing on HUM TV. The story involves Ahmed Ali Akbar in the lead role playing the character of a poor, consistently rejected, and common man of the society. While this may be true, Parizaad has exceptional abilities of loyalty, truthfulness, and passion to be educated. The story unfolds as Parizaad comes across a number of tragic situations that leave him alone in the end. However, he continues to be the man he is and find the respect and wealth he never thought of. To watch the drama, click here.Another important drama currently being aired on HUM TV is Hum Kahan Kay Sachay Thay. This drama marks the come back of Mahira Khan in dramas. The story revolves around a girl named Mehreen who has a tragic life after the death of her father, and the second marriage of her mother. As the plot unfolds, the story shows how badly Mehreen is misunderstood and hated by the people she loves. Hum Kahan Kay Sachay Thay highlights how mental health issues are genuine and how silence of a person is not his or her guilt or fault. If you want to watch the drama, click here. Also Read about Top 10 Tik Tok Celebs of PakistanClick here for more Entertainment StoriesAns. Although all drama serials are among the best dramas, however, the one that stood out from the rest this year was Mere Paas Tum Ho. This drama created so much hype that its last episode went on-air in cinemas.Ans. As per the dramas list of the year 2020, the best drama in Pakistan in Mere Paas Tum Ho. It gained much popularity and an amazing response from viewers all over the country.Ans. Among all of the best dramas of 2020, the best and the must-watch dramas include Mere Paas Tum Ho, Ehd-e-Wafa, and Ranjha Ranjha Kardi.Ans. Drama serial Mere Paas Tum Ho is on the top of the chart for having the highest TRP in 2020. This makes it the most-watched drama of the year. The list has been updated on 29 November 2021.