The fashion and film industry is flooded with attractive, handsome, and dashing highest paid Pakistani actors with unique looks and incredible acting skills that attract the people around the world.It is not easy to go for only ten successful and high paid actors, but we have tried to select 10 out of a vast number of amazing highest paid Pakistani actors. Moreover, it was indeed very difficult but we have gathered all the names in ascending order of their net worth.
The world admires the peerless beauty and vast talent of Pakistani people. Moreover, our handsome actors are very famous among foreign women and they even compare their national actors with our Pakistani actors.
Here we are going to introduce you to the list of top 10 highest paid Pakistani actors. Eager to know about them, so, without wasting any more second of yours, check out the incredible rundown of the highest paid Pakistani actors and scroll down to improve your knowledge regarding Pakistani male celebrities.In Karachi, the heartthrob of Pakistan, Fawad Afzal Khan, was born on November 21, 1981. The multi-talented actor was a singer at the beginning of his career. Also, the band made a debut album in 2003, but later on, it was dissolved in 2007. In the same year, Khan did his debut film Khuda Kay Liye by playing a supporting role. Moreover, in the television industry, he played a leading role in :Fawad stepped into Bollywood and did a Prince’s role in the movie Khoobsurat (2014). Also, in 2016, his Bollywood movie Kapoor and Sons emerged as the most commercial success. Fawad won numerous Awards nationally as well as internationally due to public praise and love. He got married to her teenage love Sadaf Khan in 2005. Hamza Ali Abbasi, Pakistani theater artist, model, television and film actor, and director, was born on June 23, 1984. He got his education from the United States and returned to Pakistan to pursue his career. The play Dally in the Dark was his first debut play on television in 2006. Later on, he appeared in a short film directed by Bilal Lashari, The Glorious Resolve (2010). In 2013, Hamza did two feature films Main Hoon Shahid Afridi and Waar. Talented Hamza is also praised for his role in the romantic comedy movie Jawani Phir Nahi Ani. Some of his famous dramas are:
 The British born Pakistani model and actor is the son of an English mother and a Pakistani father. He was born on September 5, 1981, in London, England. Mikaal does not just have a good looks, but he also has excellent modeling and acting skills. The Pakistani fashion model is known for his comedy commercials for Ufone.After much commercializing, he appeared in the Abrar-ul-Haq video album Sanu Tere Naal Pyar Ho Gya. Mikaal also appeared in many Bollywood films like, Shoot on Sight in 2008, U R My Jaan, and Baby. Mikaal is happily married and has two beautiful daughters. His famous television drama serials include: Imran Abbas was born on October 15, 1982, in Islamabad. He completed his education from the National College of Arts and is an architect. Imran took his career in Pakistani showbiz. He started his career through modeling, and later on, he skipped modeling and stepped into the drama industry.In 2013, the handsome actor made his Lollywood debut with Yasir Nawaz’s romantic movie Anjuman. Creature 3D and Jaanisar are Imran’s Bollywood movies. Imran Abbas has lots of fans, especially girls who are crazy after him. Also, Imran made his name through hard work with dedication and passion. His top serials include: Faisal Qureshi was born to a famous film actress Afshan Qureshi on October 26, 1973, in Lahore. He is a real talent of Pakistan working for his country to provide quality entertainment. Faisal Qureshi has countless fans in the whole world because he looks handsome, stylish, attractive, and bold.Faisal started his showbiz career through Emergency Ward and Andhera Ujala as a child artist on PTV. Faisal’s significant adult acting role began in the movie Saza (1992). So, Faisal also did morning shows and is a fantastic host. Moreover, he got married three times in his life and is only keeping his third wife, Sana Faisal. His top Pakistani dramas are: The attractive actor, host, and model of Pakistan, Ahsan Khan, was born on October 9, 1981, in London, England. He started his acting career in 1998. He did some movies, including Nikah, Dil Mera Dharkan Teri, Billi, Love in Hong Kong, Ishq Khuda, Ghar Kab Aao Gay, and later, he moved on to television serials. Moreover, Ahsan is a liberal person due to her upbringing in the UK and married at a young age. That’s what keeps him away from scandals. His best dramas include: Handsome Danish Taimoor was born in Karachi on February 16, 1983. Danish did his degree from the University of Karachi. Before moving on to acting, he also did modeling. In the field of acting, he did Mystery Series on Indus Vision. Moreover, he also had a brief appearance in Dil Diya Dehleez. Some of his memorable serials include:The superstar actor did many telefilms and movies too. Wrong Number and Jalaibee depicts his incredible acting skills. So, some new of his films are going to be released soon. Danish is a real talent of Pakistan who tries to do his best in every role. Also, he married his co-star, Ayeza Khan, after having a relationship of 8 years. Both are happily married. The dashing star, energetic and young, Shehryar Munawar, was born on August 9, 1988. Shehryar completed his bachelor in Finance from the Institute of Business Administration, Karachi. He is a brilliant young talented Pakistani actor and film producer. His notable serial Meray Dard Ko Jo Zuban Miley won him Hum Award for “Best New Sensation Television”. Moreover, he was the film producer and a cast of the fantastic and remarkable movie Ho Mann Jahaan. Moreover, his impressive personality is the reason for his incredible success and popularity. The incredible talent of Pakistan Film and TV Industry, Adeel Hussain, was born on June 30, 1978, in Karachi. He entered into the showbiz Industry in the late ’90s and worked hard to be at the stage of popularity and success. Also, Adeel made his place in the Pakistani Industry through working in various commercials, radio jockey, music videos, TV dramas, and telefilms. Moreover, he won the “Kara Film Festival Award” for his outstanding performance in Duniya Goal Hai. Also, he made a special appearance in Bin Roye in 2015 and did his first debut film Ho Mann Jahan in 2016. Nobody can ever forget his brilliant characters and acting skills in:This charming personality was born on June 26, 1983, in Karachi. He started his career by modeling and debuting in serial Sheeshay Ka Mahal, the same year. Later on, he started becoming a favorite TV actor and reached the height of popularity in a short time. So, he is currently hosting a game show, Jeeto Pakistan, and earning great fame and money. Also, Fahad has an adorable little family and is happily married to his wife, Sana Fahad. This is the list of top 10 highest paid Pakistani actors and models who made it big in the Pakistani entertainment industry. So, we will keep you people updated with the upcoming latest talented actors as well so keep visiting our website for more updates and such articles.
Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. 

