Pakistani Films have made an impeccable impact on the audience by serving some great projects in its revolutionary stages. Films like Bol, Verna, Mein Hoon Shahid Afridi, and many others have gained massive respect for the industry.Now that the bar is set, the Pakistani audience expects to see exceptional movies every year. Which is not happening for quite some time due to the pandemic.However, things have started to loosen up and people are getting back to the normal routine. It is safe for film industries to release all the projects that it has been holding due to the virus.The audience has been patient. We are now on the verge of collapsing if we do not get to see those movies that we have been dying for to hit the cinemas.Here are some of the movies that are expected to release this year or next year.The ‘Legend of Maula Jutt’ is at the top of our list because it is the most awaited Pakistani film so far and it has already created too much hype. Bilal Lashari casts the most renowned actors of Pakistani films. Fawad Khan, Hamza Ali Abbasi, Mahira Khan, and Humaima Malik are to be seen in leading roles in the movie.The question as to when it will come to the big screen has been in the air ever since Bilal Lashari announced its release date in 2020. However, the release of the movie did not happen due to legal reasons. But now the release is delayed due to the pandemic.
The Film is the remake of the 1979 movie ‘Maula Jutt’. Ammar Hikmat and Bilal Lashari have collaboratively worked together to produce and direct this story. While Nasir Adeeb is going to privilege the movie with his famous dialogue work.A Nadeem Baig’s movie ‘London Nahi Jaunga’ is set to release next year. The main cast involves Humayun Saeed. It is still in question who will play as opposed to the leading male character but the options are between Mehwish Hayat and Kubra Khan.Rumors say that Mehwish Hayat is appointed for the leading role. However, Mere Pas Tum Ho’s actor has clearly stated in an interview that they have not finalized the leading female actress yet but it will be a tough call to make between Mehwish Hayat and Kubra Khan.The writer of the film is no other than Khalil Ur Rehman who has written some fabulous dramas and films that were a big success.Almost everyone in Pakistan Loves Feroze Khan for his acting skills. It has been a while since we wanted the actor to come to the big screen and it is finally happening. A film by Salman Iqbal Productions, directed by Qasim Ali Mureed, is set to release soon.Urwa Hussain, who has started her production debut with the movie, has said in an interview that they have winded up the last shootings in Turkey and are now looking into post-production.Leading roles in the movie involve Farhan Saeed, Feroze Khan, Iman Ali, and Sonya Hussain.
Another one on the list of Pakistani films which will release soon with our beloved actors. The movie by Faisal Qureshi stars Fawad Khan, Ali Safina, Hina Dilpazir, and none other than the famous ex-sportsman, Wasim Akram. The most handsome Mikaal Zulfiqar wis also seen in the movie while Gohar Rasheed and Jan Rambo are also a part of the project.Imran Ashraf is probably the most humble and down-to-earth celebrity in the Pakistan film industry. The actor has not only impressed us with his acting skills but has also inspired us to do better with the kind of life he leads.‘Bhola’, as we know him, is all set to play the leading role in an upcoming movie Dum Mast by Mohammad Ehteshamduddin. Amar Khan will be performing alongside Imran and both will make their debut with this movie.Related: Pakistani short film Mulaqat is nominated for the prestigious Venice Film FestivalDirected by Nabeel Qureshi, Quaid-e-Azam Zindabad is another action-comedy Pakistani film that will hit the theatres next year. Teasers have been circulating in the media and it has kept us on our toes. The wait will soon be over and we will get to see the most talented and stunning Mahira Khan alongside ‘Jeeto Pakistan’ host, Fahad Mustafa.Kamli is a tragic love story by Sarmad Khoosat. The movie casts ‘Lahore se Aagey’ actress Saba Qamar. She is a popular actress with her fabulous performance in many dramas.  Earlier before COVID,  Cheekh star has revealed that they are done with the shooting. And the audience will get to see Kamli in theatres at Eid 2020.  However, the film, like many others, was caught up with the rage of COVID and could not make it to theatres. Now that we are moving forward, the project is all set to release the movie soon.Ghabrana Nahi Hai stars Saba Qamar as opposed to the talented Drama star Zahid Ahmed. The storyline revolves around a  policeman who tries to save the girl played by Saba Qamar.As Saba Qamar is done with Kamli. She has announced her initiation with this project back in April. In an interview, she made her remarks on the movie saying that it is close to her and she loves its script.Fatman is another project by Nabeel Qureshi that was suppose to come out a little earlier. Na Maloom Afrad’s director had to postpone the shooting of the film due to the spread of COVID. However, now that we are stabilizing, the cast and production crew are already working on it and will soon announce the release date.The movie stars the famous Ahmed Ali Butt, who will make his entrance in the film as the leading role for the first time.Rehbara is one of those Pakistani films which is long due for its release. Back in 2017, Ahsan Khan, who is the leading character in the movie, told us that the shooting is 95% complete and will soon hit the theatres. However, 5% of the movie is still in production, we guess.The movie stars ever-gorgeous Ayesha Omar opposite Ahsan Khan. She is popular for her character as Khoobsurat in Bulbulay.Mohib Mirza’s first film project Ishrat: Made in China, features himself in the leading role alongside Sanam Saeed. People are enticed by the promotional looks of the cast that is on the social media handles of the leading actors. HSY is a part of the project and we can finally see him in some action. The release date of the movie is not confirm yet. But the audience has hopes with this year.The anticipated Pakistani film stars our all-time favorite on-screen couple Mahira and Fawad Khan. This is enough to hook us up while the trailer is yet to release. Bits and pieces have been collected about the project through Humsafar star Instagram. In a post, Mahira Khan has clearly stated that the shooting is complete. The audience will get to see their hard work soon.The movie is an autobiography on the life of Lieutenant General Nigar Johar Khan. She was the first and only three-star General in the Pakistan army.The project is a tribute to the surgeon who has accomplished the designation for the first time in the history of Pakistani films. Mahira Khan has the privilege to portray the character of Nigar in the film.   Read more: Top 10 Pakistani dramas by Umera AhmedThe most viral sensation, the heart-throbbing, Hania Amir is all set to make her appearance in the leading role alongside Ali Rehman Khan in an upcoming film project Pardey Mein Rehne Do.Wajahat Rauf, after his big success of Chalawa, has announced the movie production and leading cast in an interview. The movie will be a satirical comedy on the social norms of society.Chakkar is a crime mystery movie by Yasir Nawaz. It stars Ahsan Khan, Neelum Muneer, and Yasir himself in the leading roles. The shooting of the project is complete. But the release is delayed due to the pandemic. Now that things are getting back to normal, we will get to see this Pakistani film soon. 