Learn about our story and how we empower women and girls to achieve their full economic potentialsMeet our global team of passionate women and men dedicated to women's economic empowermentLearn more about our global partners who share our missionDive into women's economic empowerment and engage with some of our thematic initiativesLearn more about what's been going on at Empower Women. Check out our latest news and updatesExplore and engage in moderator-led and peer-to-peer discussions on the topics that matter to youGet inspired by the many ways people just like you are creating an impact for women and girlsConnect with your community -- a global network of advocates for women's economic empowermentConnect with organizations and companies that share our values on women’s economic empowermentExplore online and offline opportunities and events that can enrich and advance your careerfeminism is “the belief that men and women should have equal rights and opportunities.” We live in a world where the genders are far from equal, which serves to harm both men and women alike. While we believe that feminism is a positive movement that continues to bring beneficial social change to society, some people still aren’t convinced. With the social rights movement in a more powerful position than ever, the feminist cause is encountering a major drawback: the movement in regards to certain types of men who feel as though they are on a higher social tier than women. By now, these men should realize that the ideals of feminism benefit the male gender as well as the female, but instead, they have launched a full-fledged attack against its empowering ethics.As women gain a larger foothold in society today, some groups of men begin to bring up now obsolete, and rather childish arguments such as “can I punch women?” and “what if they gain more rights than me?”. This only stops the progressive fight for equality, as feminism attempts to put men and women on a completely equal playing field. A man, or a woman, shouldn’t punch anyone. Men won’t lose rights if women gain more; it’ll simply allow them to work with the opposite gender. With more and more men finding an increasing faith in feminism, one should find it easy to ditch these arguments and join women and men in a rise for equality.The importance of feminism for men relies on a simple fact, and that is that the concept of equality is not endangering, and never has been. But if men want to strive for equality, they must first accept a reality that surrounds themselves first: men are put in a position of power by society.This is not to downplay how men feel, and whether or not all of them are “monsters.” It is instead to state that the entire point of feminism is to lift women up to the same level as men, which is currently a higher social and economic tier. #He4SheRelevant Tags:  Please complete the required fields  Please complete the required fields 