Dishonesty in the workplace includes employee theft, submitting incorrect time sheets, lying to managers and co-workers and unethical conduct such as harassment or drug abuse. When a small business experiences dishonesty in the workplace it can result in lost revenue, a drop in productivity and lower morale. By understanding the causes of workplace dishonesty, an employer can develop policies to combat it.Dishonesty in the workplace includes employee theft, submitting incorrect time sheets, lying to managers and co-workers and unethical conduct such as harassment or drug abuse. When a small business experiences dishonesty in the workplace it can result in lost revenue, a drop in productivity and lower morale. By understanding the causes of workplace dishonesty, an employer can develop policies to combat it.The company allows and even perpetuates dishonesty by not taking a strong stance against it. To dissuade workplace dishonesty there must be comprehensive policies outlining what dishonesty is and the consequences for employees who violate those policies. The company management and ownership must be vigilant in enforcing these policies to create a culture that shuns dishonesty.Dishonesty in the workplace can be a cause of low morale, but it can also be triggered by an existing atmosphere of employee dissatisfaction as well. Employees who are dissatisfied with their jobs, the company management or conditions in the workplace may engage in employee theft, misrepresentation of work hours on their time sheets and slowing down production, according to Justin A. Walsh, writing on the International Foundation for Protection Officers website. Addressing morale issues can help deter workplace dishonesty.A company that doesn't have a checks and balances system on its account books or an accurate inventory system can become a victim of dishonesty in the workplace. If employees don't fear being caught, then the idea of stealing money or supplies from the company can linger among the staff. Create a series of checks on all accounting entries, petty cash receipts and inventory systems to monitor activity and prevent dishonesty.Employees who believe they're underpaid may feel inclined to steal from the company or pad time sheet hours to add to their income. If your staff doesn't feel that your company offers sufficient career development or advancement, for example, then production may drop and employee absenteeism can rise.ReferencesResourcesWriter BioGeorge N. Root III began writing professionally in 1985. His publishing credits include a weekly column in the "Lockport Union Sun and Journal" along with the "Spectrum," the "Niagara Falls Gazette," "Tonawanda News," "Watertown Daily News" and the "Buffalo News." Root has a Bachelor of Arts in English from the State University of New York, Buffalo.© 2022 Hearst