Children Need Your Help After Russia's Invasion of UkraineEvery mother and child has the right to the highest attainable standard of health. Currently women and children in some countries cannot access this right. Make a donation today to help children where it is needed most.Every child needs a childhood. Our child-focused appeals achieve measurable change for children in poverty around the world. Learn about our current work here.Use our tax calculator to estimate the potential tax benefit of your donation.
Fundraise for Us
Gifts in Wills
Major Gifts
Help provide life-saving maternal and child health careChange a child's life. Become a sponsor. 

Transform the life of an entire community.Update your personal and payment details.All you need to know about Child SponsorshipAll you need to know about Community SponsorshipBecause every child needs someone like youLooking for the perfect gift? When you give a Gift for Good, it's sent to a child, family or community who really needs it. When you purchase a Gift for Good, you can select to send a gift card with your order to personalise your gift.We pool all gift donations to maximise the impact you make, allocating your contribution when and where it is needed most. Give the gift of a lifetimeAccess to clean, safe water is one of the most basic and essential human needs. Without it, providing quality health care is made more difficult and often leaves those most vulnerable at risk.Children and families in Papua New Guinea (PNG) are facing a devastating third wave of COVID-19 as the Delta strain sweeps across the country...The ongoing support of more than 42,000 Australians has allowed ChildFund and its local partners to rapidly respond to the urgent needs of communities during this very challenging time...Keep up to date with all the ChildFund stories from across the world.Learn about ChildFund AustraliaOur programs and impactLatest news and media enquiries


Administrative policies and proceduresCountries you are helpingHave a question or some feedback and would like to get in touch with us?Annual reports and publicationsCareers and volunteeringLearn more about ChildFund Australia’s work with these frequently asked questions (FAQs).Because every child needs someone like you


Home »
            Stories



      You have  Gifts for Good in your basket.    
      Are you ready to change a childs life? There are over 300 children who urgently need a sponsor    
      We noticed you were looking to sponsor a community. Your support will not only change the life of a child, but an entire community.    
      Last time you were here, you were looking to help vulnerable children and families. Your support can save and change lives.    
June 11, 2021
CHILDFUND AUSTRALIA
                            CATEGORY Child Protection

June 11, 2021
CHILDFUND AUSTRALIA
CATEGORY Child Protection
Help protect children from violence and exploitationAt ChildFund we believe all children should grow up feeling
cared for, encouraged and valued, no matter where they live.Every child should explore, learn and thrive, and be able to
reach their potential.Unfortunately, many children around the world grow up in an environment of fear, unable to have the childhood they need. Millions of children are forced to work in dangerous conditions when they should be learning and growing in the safety of a classroom.The COVID-19 pandemic threatens to force more children into the workforce, with the economic impact adding further pressure to the household income of vulnerable families. Despite laws to protect children, and an overall decline in the number of child labourers, 152 million children are still working too early. Below we take a look at how all 152 million children around the world are affected by exploitation as child labourers.  Of the 152 million children working, 73 million are in hazardous jobs. Agriculture, construction and manufacturing are some of the main industries employing children. In these industries children can be exposed to toxic chemicals, expected to operate dangerous machinery, and expected to work long hours and risk abuse.When children work they often have to drop out of school, or
their education suffers as a result of the additional responsibilities they
have outside of school.“In my life, I am happiest when I go to school, and see my classmates having fun,” said Phhuong, from Cambodia who dropped out of school in Grade 6 to help her younger brother continue his education.“When I see my friends going to school, I feel very
regretful. “I am not able to meet them any more. We used to play together.”A report by the International Labor Organisation in 2015 found that in some countries working children were half as likely to attend school as children who were not working.Without an education, or with a limited education, children are more likely to end up low-paid jobs which decreases their chances to escape poverty. In the world’s poorest countries, one in four children is a child labourer.In many cases, the eldest child in the family is the most
vulnerable to child labour. As soon as they are old enough to work, they are
expected to help provide for their younger siblings.Sometimes children will be forced to work if one of their
parents is unable to work. This is what happened to Arum’s daughter Mony, who
is 13 years old and working in a dangerous brick factory after he mother was
injured at work.“I don’t want my kids uneducated like me,” Arun said. “I want
them to study so they’re able to find better jobs.“But I didn’t know what to do when my wife could not help me
out on family income.”Almost half of all child labourers are younger than 11 years old. In most regions, girls and boys are equally likely to be engaged in child labour.COVID-19 has shocked markets and economies around the globe. The resulting impact has the potential to push millions of children living in developing communities into child labour. As parents become sick with COVID-19, children may be forced to work to support the household. There is also no guarantee that all children in developing communities will be able to return to school once government lockdowns lift and schools reopen. Children who do not return to school are at high risk of early entry to the workforce. Regions where child labour markets have been particularly resistant to changes in policy and practice may see circumstances become more difficult for children in the workforce. Disrupted supply chains, falling commodity prices and stalled manufacturing could see children, already in the workforce, enduring more hazardous conditions than before.World Day Against Child Labour is a United Nations sanctioned observance that is held annually on 12 June. The observance raises awareness of child labour and encourages activism against child labour of all forms.World Day Against Child Labour 2021 is focused on mitigating the affects of the COVID-19 pandemic on progress towards reducing child labour and exploitation around the globe. This year the United Nations will launch a “Week of Action”, beginning on 12 June, with the release of new estimates on child labour and the effect of COVID-19 on child labour statistics.If you’d like to get involved with World Day Against Child Labour, there’s a few ways you can join the conversation:ChildFund believes that ending the exploitation of children is inextricably linked to our poverty reduction work. Poverty can result in more children becoming involved in
harmful labour, rendering them vulnerable to trafficking, and increasing the
likelihood of girls marrying at a young age.ChildFund works with local partners, governments and communities to prevent and respond to the exploitation of children around the world. Donate now to help give children a childhood in which they are nurtured, protected, and have access to opportunity.You can also give to our COVID-19 emergency appeal, and help provide vital assistance for children impacted by the pandemic around the globe. You’ll help keep children safe during a crisis where children are at risk of being exploited.Millions of children are forced to work in dangerous conditions when they should be learning and growing in the safety of a classroom.Help protect children from violence and exploitation
REGION All Regions COUNTRY All Countries Three ways young girls are being empowered this International Day of the Girl ChildDigitalisation is transforming child protection servicesWhy we must accelerate progress to end child labourHelp protect children from violence and exploitationSign up to get the latest stories straight to your inboxChildFund Australia (ABN 79 002 885 761) is a Public Benevolent Institution and has Deductible Gift Recipient (DGR) status with the Australian Tax Office.


ChildFund Australia recognises the significance of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and cultures. We acknowledge the Traditional Owners of country throughout Australia and recognise their continuing connection to land, water and community. We pay our respect to them and their cultures, and to Elders past, present and emerging.
