March 22, 2021Knowing how to deal with dishonesty in the workplace can increase productivity and team cohesion. Regardless of the type of company your work for, identifying and eliminating workplace dishonesty can have a direct impact on its success. Effectively dealing with dishonest employees is a valuable skill, but it requires research and practice. In this article, we discuss why dealing with dishonesty in the workplace is important, provide actionable steps on how to do it, plus tips for promoting honest work behavior.Recognizing and eliminating workplace dishonesty is important for a number of reasons. Some of them are:It improves overall productivity. Misinformation tends to cause larger damage if it is not identified on time. Inaccurate data can lead to misinformed decisions, which in turn can produce undesirable results. Alternatively, healthy and honest communication between employees can help the organization avoid such issues by honestly reporting any inadequacies and addressing them in a timely manner.It improves business reputation. A company with a history of honesty and ethical practices can establish a reputation, persuading more potential customers to work with them.It strengthens relationships between employees. A group of employees who trust each other is more likely to deliver good results and work together efficiently. Also, not having to deal with dishonest coworkers can have a positive effect on employee mental health.Related: How To Maintain Professional Integrity in the WorkplaceConsider taking these steps when dealing with workplace dishonesty:As someone mediating a case of dishonesty in the workplace, your first step is being absolutely certain that it actually took place. You should look for clear evidence that an employee was not honest, but you should do so only by using legal methods and fully respecting privacy laws. Another employee's word is not strong enough evidence to conclude that you are dealing with a case of workplace dishonesty, as you may find it difficult if the case gets to a court of law.After concluding that you are in fact dealing with dishonest behavior from an employee, the next step is usually to evaluate what the consequences are for the company. Realistically evaluating the potential impact of this situation can help you make a plan on how to deal with it appropriately.You need to find out if the employee in question has a history of dishonest behavior or if this instance is an isolated one. A recommended course of action for this would be to contact any of their former employers.Once you are certain that the dishonest behavior took place and you are aware of the potential impact it can have on the organization, you need to openly and honestly discuss the matter with the employee in question. Such a discussion can reveal some of the motives behind their behavior and even resolve the entire issue, in situations when the damage was minimal.If you consider dishonest behavior to be serious, you need to outline clear consequences for such actions, starting from a fine or a probation period, up to termination. Knowing there are clear and well-defined consequences for such actions may determine the employee to correct their ways and it can potentially send a message to other employees who may be tempted to do the same in the future.Related: What Are Business Ethics? Definition, Importance and TipsThere can be many potential reasons for an employee's workplace dishonesty. By having an open discussion with them you can uncover their motivation and maybe work together with them to resolve the underlying issue that led to their behavior. If the issue does not pose a serious threat to the company you can offer the employee various counseling and training programs to help them deal with the issues that made them act in a dishonest manner. For instance, they may be under extreme workplace stress and become tempted to lie about their performance.If the employee doesn't show signs of being willing to work on their issues or if their actions seriously jeopardize the company, you may need to immediately terminate your relationship with them. Depending on the exact situation and nature of the relationship, it may be a good idea to consult an attorney, so you can be sure you are fully compliant with the law.Related: 15 Ethical Principles in BusinessHonest workplaces generally deliver better results. Here are some tips on how to promote honesty at work:Promote open communication. Encourage your employees to be open with you and with each other and make them understand that they can speak up regarding any inappropriate workplace behavior without any negative consequences. Everyone involved should understand that communication is crucial to the company's well-being and their own.Establish a clear code of conduct. Employees need to have the opportunity to research and learn what the office rules and responsibilities are. Not having a clear rule book may make it difficult to assess a case of dishonesty in the workplace.Be consistent in establishing and enforcing workplace policies. Employees are more likely to respect policies that are enforced indiscriminately across the board. If a manager or another high-level employee gets the same treatment as an entry-level employee for the same issue, this can send a message to the rest of the staff that everyone within the organization is treated fairly, regardless of their status.Make sure employees respect all procedures. A culture of workplace honesty and integrity usually starts from minor everyday actions. Make sure the employees follow and respect all procedures, even those with no apparent consequence, like one letting another use their keycard or performing a computer operation using their user name. Employees that see a clear consistency in promoting honest behavior are more likely to respect all company policies.