ReviseSociologyA level sociology revision – education, families, research methods, crime and deviance and more!Introduction – The BasicsInequality between men and women is universal and the most significant form of inequalityGender norms are socially constructed not determined by biology and can thus be changed. Patriarchy is the main cause of gender inequality – women are subordinate because men have more power. Feminism is a political movement; it exists to rectify sexual inequalities, although strategies for social change vary enormously. There are four types of Feminism – Radical, Marxist, Liberal, and Difference.Radical Feminism Blames the exploitation of women on men. It is primarily men who have benefitted from the subordination of women. Women are ‘an oppressed group. Society is patriarchal – it is dominated and ruled by men – men are the ruling class, and women the subject class.Rape, violence and pornography are methods through which men have secured and maintained their power over women. Andrea Dworkin (1981)Radical feminists have often been actively involved in setting up and running refuges for women who are the victims of male violence. Rosemarie Tong (1998) distinguishes between two groups of radical feminist: Radical-libertarian feminists believe that it is both possible and desirable for gender differences to be eradicated, or at least greatly reduced, and aim for a state of androgyny in which men and women are not significantly different. Radical-cultural feminists believe in the superiority of the feminine. According to Tong radical cultural feminists celebrate characteristics associated with femininity such as emotion, and are hostile to those characteristics associated with masculinity such as hierarchy.The various alternatives suggested by Radical Feminists include separatism – women only communes, and Matrifocal households. Some also practise political Lesbianism and political celibacy as they view heterosexual relationships as “sleeping with the enemy.”Marxist FeminismCapitalism rather than patriarchy is the principal source of women’s oppression, and capitalists as the main beneficiaries.Women’s subordination plays a number of important functions for capitalism:Women reproduce the labour force for free (socialisation is done for free)Women absorb anger – women keep the husbands going. Because the husband has to support his wife and children, he is more dependent on his job and less likely to demand wage increases. The traditional nuclear also performs the function of ‘ideological conditioning’ – it teaches the ideas that the Capitalist class require for their future workers to be passive.The disadvantaged position of women is seen to be a consequence of the emergence of private property and their lack of ownership of the means of productionThey are more sensitive to differences between women who belong to the ruling class and proletarian families. Marxist Feminists believe that there is considerable scope for co-operation between working class women and men and that both can work togetherIn Communist society, Marxist feminists believe that gender inequalities will disappear. Liberal Feminism Nobody benefits from existing inequalities: both men and women are harmed The explanation for gender inequality lies not so much in structures and institutions of society but in its culture and values. Socialisation into gender roles has the consequence of producing rigid, inflexible expectations of men and womenDiscrimination prevents women from having equal opportunitiesLiberal Feminists do not seek revolutionary changes: they want changes to take place within the existing structure. The creation of equal opportunities is the main aim of liberal feminists – e.g. the Sex Discrimination Act and the Equal Pay Act. Liberal feminists try to eradicate sexism from the children’s books and the media.Liberal Feminist ideas have probably had the most impact on women’s lives – e.g. mainstreaming has taken place. Difference Feminism/ Postmodern FeminismDo not see women as a single homogenous group. MC/WC , Criticised preceding feminist theory for claiming a ‘false universality’ (white, western heterosexual, middle class) Criticised preceding Feminists theory of being essentialistCritiqued preceding Feminist theory as being part of the masculinist Enlightenment Project Postmodern Feminism – concerned with language (discourses) and the relationship between power and knowledge rather than ‘politics and opportunities’ Helene Cixoux – An example of a postmodern/ destabilising theoristCriticisms of Feminist TheoriesMarxist 1. Radical Feminists – ignores other sources of inequality such as sexual violence. 2. Patriarchal systems existed before capitalism, in tribal societies for example. 3. The experience of women has not been particularly happy under communism.Liberal1. Based upon male assumptions and norms such as individualism and competition, and encourages women to be more like men and therefor deny the ‘value of qualities traditionally associated with women such as empathy.2. Liberalism is accused of emphasising public life at the expense of private life. 3. Radical and Marxist Feminists – it fails to take account of deeper structural inequalities 4. Difference Feminists argue it is an ethnocentric perspective – based mostly on the experiences of middle class, educated women.Radical 1. The concept of patriarchy has been criticised for ignoring variations in the experience of oppression. 2. Some critics argue that it focuses too much on the negative experiences of women, failing to recognise that some women can have happy marriages for example.3. It tends to portray women as universally good and men as universally bad, It has been accused of man hating, not trusting all men.Difference Walby, women are still oppressed by objective social structures – namely Patriarchy Dividing women sub-groups weakens the movement for change.Related Posts Feminist Perspectives on the FamilySources Used to Write this Post Lol of course his names JoshI have a club dedicated to me…so flattered.Bless you.Hey Joshx45, stfu please and thank you.
hope you have a mediocre day
xoxo
a proud feminist <3Hey Joshx45 no one asked so shut up
xoxoxox
a feminist <3Alice, nobody wants anything from misandrists, except men with serious self esteem issues. They will take your gaslighting, because they are lonely.I don’t expect you to change at all. But some of these boys who act as allies to your prejudiced movement, might recognize this toxic behaviour, and change their minds.It’s for them…you are already lost. You couldn’t care less about equality. You are sexist bigots.Incel – the go to term whenever a man challenges toxic femininity. It means Involuntary Celibate.
Most of us base our opinions on experience of women, not a lack of it.Veiled insults will not help you.Hi, I really think joshx45’s comment needs to be deleted – it’s highly misinformed and screams of incel-ish entitlementMen literally die, defending women’s “honour” let alone safety. As for saving her life, I always hear stories of guys who jumped in a river to save a woman or into a burning building for them. When do you hear of women doing it. Once in a blue moon.Judgement? Women literally get away with attempted murder and pedophilia, a lot of the time.
Statistics show you get less time for the same crime, consistently.I don’t think I should tell women how to be women. I was pointing out you’re hypocrites. Women always talk about “real men” or trying to redefine male identity, when they aren’t men.
 You define yourselves, and men define ourselves.You don’t attack men for being men?
Then disavow the likes of Clem Ford, Shanty Bink’s, Kate Smurthwaite, and others of their ilk. “True feminists” need to be vocal about it. If you really believe what you say, then you need to combat it, or it will destroy your movement. As Karen Straughan put it “debating a feminist is like swordfighting a fart”Oh and…I can find examples in this text above of shaming language and misandry..FFS practise some self awareness.To Joshx451. Not using the correct definition of feminism
2. Demanding chivalry when equality doesn’t benefit women? Uh, no, I don’t care about the disadvantages of equality, if I am crying about inequality and then get that then COMPLAIN, I’m an idiot and you have all the rights to slap me. I’d rather be paid an equal amount to men, be able to walk on the streets without fear… etc.
3. How does this relate to us having lack of restraint? If you’re arguing with a feminist and they get emotional, then you’re just arguing with the wrong person. We didn’t create feminism to argue, we made it to spread awareness and get equality and rights.
4. Once again, if you want to argue with a feminist, argue with one who is up for debate and ready to argue? Not everybody is great at arguing, as well as even if we accuse that, it’s because a lot of the time people compare things TO change the topic. Source: I have argued with plenty of men.
5. The point of feminism is for equality and WOMEN rights, we don’t have to talk about the issues of men since that is NOT the point or reason for feminism, leave that to men rights activists.
6. We don’t get offended by being judged “as much as a man”, we get offended over being fucking judged? Literally everyone will take offence to being judged at least once, it isn’t an equality thing? Also, even so, I’m sure it’s more common for women to be judged than it is for a man to be.
7. How often do you see someone say “Not all women” compared to seeing someone say “Not all men”? (See? arguing with someone, I used a comparison, all of a sudden it’s about men and not feminism? Contradicted!) How could you compare feminists to people who say “Not all women?” in fact I assume the only time they say “Not all women” is when they say “NO WOMEN” because men have unrealistic standards for them. Also, don’t you think it’s more appropriate to say not all women? I mean, they never say it under posts about women sharing their rape/victim story, if a woman says it it’s probably because you’re talking about how women loveeee bad boys… you say not all men when they are being vulnerable and opening up about BEING ASSAULTED by A MAN.
8. A man should NOT BE ALLOWED to comment on the definition of feminism since it is made FOR women BY women. You’re allowed to judge us and tell us what a real woman is? How we should dress, act, think, etc? Why can’t we tell you to have basic human decency?
9. Using a “minority” of male abusers to justify all men is NOT what us feminists do, in fact, we use a MAJORITY of male abusers to justify all men. Even if it isn’t all men who ABUSE, when was the last time you saw a man defend a woman? Help a woman? Those men are part of the problem too, I have never met a woman who hasn’t been harassed or assaulted or raped, nor have I met a woman who knows any women who haven’t been. We also never say that men can’t accuse all women of things.
10. FEMINISTS don’t laugh at physical harm to men or anything, are you gonna back that up? Those are people who hate men. Feminists want EQUALITY and RIGHTS, we do not attack other men for being a victim or for being a man.Oh, does the truth hurt? Poor baby. You want your pacifier?can someone delete joshx45’s ignorant comment? 🙂10 signs You’re with a feminist:1: using crass oversimplified generalisations about the male gender, while she complains about men doing it about her gender.
2: Demanding chivalry when equality would not benefit her, in a situation.
3: Confusing emotional incontinence with emotional literacy.
4: Accusing comparative discussion on equality of being whataboutery.
5: Minimising abuse of men, inflating abuse of women.
6: Offence over being judged as much as a man. Equally, in other words.
7: Saying ‘not all women’, then getting annoyed when told ‘not all men’.
8: Rejecting male definitions of femininity, whilst telling you what a real man should be.
9: Using a minority of male abusers to justify attitudes to all men. This is equivalent to a man saying “I will never trust women, because of Aileen Wuornos, or Joanne Dennehy”
10: Laughing at physical harm to men. E.g #KillAllMen, male circumcisions, etc.Explained in a lucid way😍😍Hi – I just use wordpress.com which hosts everything!Nice weblog here! Additionally your website quite a bit up very fast! What web host are you using? Can I get your affiliate link for your host? I want my website loaded up as fast as yours lolIt’s really a cool and helpful piece of information. I am satisfied that you simply shared this helpful information with us. Please stay us up to date like this. Thanks for sharing.Wow, fantastic weblog structure! How long have you been running a blog for? you make running a blog glance easy. The whole glance of your site is excellent, as well as the content material!Great post. Simplifies the whole issue a lot. Thanks.very   educativeThis site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed.Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
						Join 6,005 other subscribers.						

							Email Address						







							Follow						
