
Jump to navigation
Learn how global poverty relates to hunger and how you can take action to save lives.Around the world, more than 780 million people live in extreme poverty on less than $1.90 per person per day, an amount which is impossible to support a healthy livelihood in any part of the world.One in three children in low- and middle-income countries suffers from chronic undernutrition. Without a sustainable source of income at a sufficient level, young children and their families do not have access to nutritious food, clean water or health care. And the deadly effects of undernutrition cannot be underestimated: 45% of all child deaths worldwide are from causes related to undernutrition (World Health Organization, 2018).At Action Against Hunger, we believe that no child should die from hunger. We help over 17 million people every year gain access to sustainable sources of income, clean water, nutritious food, and health care, but there is still so much to be done.► Stay up to date on all the latest information from Action Against Hunger.Here are some statistics that show the scale of global poverty and its devastating effects.Source 1: United Nations, Source 2 and 3: UNICEFSub-Saharan Africa is the region with the largest number of people living in extreme poverty. See below for a breakdown of where people living with less than $1.90 per day are located.It is estimated that 104 million children under 5 are living in extreme poverty, while that number extends to 328 million for children under 18 (World Bank, 2016).Children suffer the most when living in poverty. Their young, developing bodies are less resilient to the effects of living without clean water, food or health care. As a result, many children living in poverty suffer from malnutrition and disease. If left untreated—which is common due to limited access to health care—they cannot survive. It is estimated that less than a third of children suffering from severe acute malnutrition receive treatment.Watch the story of 13-year-old Keynyang, a brave young boy trying to support his family after conflict forced them to flee their home in South Sudan. With no money or food, his family is trying to survive by eating leaves.Keynyang's story demonstrates that extreme poverty is often the result of external factors that are far beyond the family's control. However, with the right support, there is hope. We have 40 years of experience of saving lives and supporting self-sufficiency for some of the world's most vulnerable populations. We are able to help communities become more resilient to external factors that cause extreme poverty, and help families recover from natural disasters or forced displacement. ► Sign up to learn how you can save children's lives.Hunger and undernutrition are often linked to extreme poverty and lack of access to available, sufficient, nutritious food.Action Against Hunger's food security and livelihoods programs aim to empower vulnerable communities to improve their access to food, income, and markets.  We train and build the capacity of small-scale farmers to increase production, and safely store and market their crops.In humanitarian emergencies, we provide cash transfers or cash-for-work programs to help families in crisis buy food and support local markets while also enabling them to make their own choices about their most urgent needs. Our nutrition and health programs provide lifesaving treatment to children suffering from the deadliest form of hunger: acute malnutrition. We partner with parents and communities to educate and change behaviors - helping to prevent malnutrition and to spot signs of the illness early. We reach more than 17 million people with lifesaving programs in 45+ countries. We are there for children and families before and after disaster strikes. We enable people to provide for themselves, see their children grow up strong, and for whole communities to prosper. We constantly search for more effective solutions, while sharing our knowledge and expertise with the world. We push for long-term change. We will never give up. Until the world is free from hunger.Action Against Hunger is leading a global movement to end hunger in our lifetimes. It innovates solutions, advocates for change, and reaches 25 million people every year with proven hunger prevention and treatment programs. As a nonprofit that works across 50 countries, its 8,300 dedicated staff members partner with communities to address the root causes of hunger, including climate change, conflict, inequity, and emergencies. It strives to create a world free from hunger, for everyone, for good.With the generous support of people like you, our emergency teams are helping save lives, providing lifesaving treatment to malnourished children and delivering urgent food and water.Together, we can take urgent action to prevent children from sliding even deeper into tragedy. Now is the time to act and help children survive.Donate NowSee All Updates
      for
      
    food.
      
    clean water.
      
    children that grow up strong.
      
    crops this year and the next.
      
    changing minds.
      
    action.
      
    Against
    
      hunger and undernutrition.
      
      killer diseases.
      
      lives cut short.
      
      drought and disaster.
      
      ignorance and indifference.
      
      hunger.
      Donate© 2022 Action Against Hunger | ACF-USA
Action Against Hunger | ACF-USA is a recognized 501(c)(3) not-for-profit organization by the IRS.Privacy Policy | Tenders
France | UK | Spain | Canada