With 189 member countries, staff from more than 170 countries, and offices in over 130 locations, the World Bank Group is a unique global partnership: five institutions working for sustainable solutions that reduce poverty and build shared prosperity in developing countries.  The World Bank Group works in every major area of development.  We provide a wide array of financial products and technical assistance, and we help countries share and apply innovative knowledge and solutions to the challenges they face.We face big challenges to help the world’s poorest people and ensure that everyone sees benefits from economic growth. Data and research help us understand these challenges and set priorities, share knowledge of what works, and measure progress.Since China began to open up and reform its economy in 1978, GDP growth has averaged almost 10 percent a year, and more than 800 million people have been lifted out of poverty. There have also been significant improvements in access to health, education, and other services over the same period.Since China began to open up and reform its economy in 1978, GDP growth has averaged almost 10 percent a year, and more than 800 million people have been lifted out of poverty. There have also been significant improvements in access to health, education, and other services over the same period.China is now an upper-middle-income country.  It will be important going forward that poverty alleviation efforts increasingly shift to address the vulnerabilities faced by the large number of people still considered poor by the standards of middle-income countries, including those living in urban areas.China’s high growth based on resource-intensive manufacturing, exports, and low-paid labor has largely reached its limits and has led to economic, social, and environmental imbalances. Reducing these imbalances requires shifts in the structure of the economy from low-end manufacturing to higher-end manufacturing and services, and from investment to consumption.Over the past few years, growth has moderated in the face of structural constraints, including declining labor force growth, diminishing returns to investment, and slowing productivity. The challenge going forward is to find new drivers of growth while addressing the social and environmental legacies of China’s previous development path.China’s rapid economic growth exceeded the pace of institutional development, and there are important institutional and reform gaps that China needs to address to ensure a high-quality and sustainable growth path. The role of the state needs to evolve and focus on providing stable market expectations and a clear and fair business environment, as well as strengthening the regulatory system and the rule of law to further support the market system.Given its size, China is central to important regional and global development issues. China is the largest emitter of greenhouse gases, with per capita emissions now surpassing those of the European Union, although slightly below the OECD average and well below the United States, and its air and water pollution affects other countries. Global environmental problems cannot be solved without China’s engagement. Moreover, maintaining economic growth at reasonable levels has important spillovers for the growth of the rest of the world economy.Many of the complex development challenges that China faces are relevant to other countries, including transitioning to a new growth model, rapid aging, building a cost-effective health system, and promoting a lower carbon energy path. China is a growing influence on other developing economies through trade, investment, and ideas.Following real GDP growth of 2.3 percent in 2020, China’s economy is projected to grow by 8.5 percent in 2021, largely driven by base effects. The growth momentum is slowing reflecting the lagged impact of policy and macroprudential tightening, floods and the recent Delta outbreak. Although lingering tighter restrictions and cautious sentiment due to the recent Delta outbreaks will weigh on the consumption recovery, its impact is expected to be largely offset by robust foreign demand and moderate policy support in the latter half of the year. Near-term risks have shifted to the downside with the key risk being recurring outbreaks led by more transmissible COVID-19 variants which could lead to a significant economic disruption. Over the medium term, China’s economy is facing structural headwinds given adverse demographics, tepid productivity growth, and the legacies of excessive borrowing and environmental pollution. These challenges require attention, with short-term macroeconomic policies and structural reforms aimed at reinvigorating the shift to more balanced high-quality growth.The government recently highlighted achieving common prosperity as a key economic objective, reinforcing signals of a possible shift in policy priorities towards tackling income inequality. Over the medium term, policies to tackle high inequality through more progressive taxation and a strengthened social protection system will ensure lasting poverty reduction, a larger middle class and help boost private consumption as a driver of growth. Last Updated: Oct 12, 2021China and the World Bank Group have worked together for over 40 years. The WBG’s new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2020 to 2025, issued in December 2019, reflects the evolution of the Bank Group’s relationship with China toward a decline in lending and a more selective engagement in line with the capital increase commitments agreed to by its shareholders in 2018.  The CPF aims to help China address some of its remaining development challenges, notably the transition to more environmentally sustainable growth, strengthen key Chinese institutions engaged in economic and social development, and reduce inequality in lagging regions.World Bank (IBRD) lending will decline over the CPF period and focus on supporting China in contributing to global public goods. As it does so, the Bank stands ready to provide more technical assistance and policy advice, as well as reimbursable advisory services (RAS), and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) will engage in China’s private sector, especially in investments in global public goods.The CPF has three broad areas of engagement:In addition, under the CPF, the World Bank Group will aim to help increase the transparency of China’s lending and investment activities as well as emphasize the importance of promoting high standards of social and environmental risk management for these activities, and share applicable lessons and knowledge from China’s poverty reduction.The CPF is informed by the Bank Group’s Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) published in early 2018 and other Bank studies including Innovative China: New Drivers of Growth published in 2019. At the CPF midpoint, the Bank Group will assess progress in CPF implementation.Last Updated: Oct 12, 2021China began its partnership with the Bank in 1980, just as it embarked on its reforms. Starting as a recipient of support from the International Development Association (IDA), the Bank Group’s fund for the poorest, China graduated from IDA in 1999 and became a donor in 2007. It became the World Bank’s third largest shareholder upon completion of the capital increase approved in 2010, the 30th anniversary of its partnership. The nature of the Bank’s activities in China has evolved over time as China’s needs and level of development have changed. In the early years, the World Bank brought international experience to help design economic reform strategies, improve project management, and address key bottlenecks to growth. More recently, this two-way relationship has evolved —the World Bank offers international expertise to help address China’s key development challenges and pilot reforms through projects and programs; and China’s development experiences enhance the Bank’s global knowledge and capacity to help other developing countries.Research